

©Copyright 2017 by Annie Brook. All rights reserved. 
Published by  
Smart Body Books 
5412 Idylwild Trail,  
Boulder, Co 80301 
Cover and book design by Chelsea Jewell 
No portions of this book, except for brief review, may be reproduced in any form without written permission  of the author and publisher. For more information contact Smart Body Books. 
Other books by Annie Brook 
available at www.anniebrook.com 
Birth’s Hidden Legacy, Vol 1 & 2 
From Conception to Crawling (book and DVD set) 
The Developing Infant 
Squishy Bug and Other Sensory Motor Games for Children 
The Adoptive Parents Handbook (ebook) 
Free ebook: Couples Strategies 
Contact Improvisation and BodyMind Centering® 
Pregnant Moms Support Group; a Curriculum Manual 
Relationship Ready: a guide for the body, heart, soul, and mind 
Sexuality and the Sacred: a guide for spirited intimacy
Acknowledgements 
I been gifted with amazing nature teachers in my life. The natural waters of the ocean, and  long hours of play in South Florida canals. I wandered the seawalls peering into the mys tery of water, gazing in awe through my snorkel mask at fish, eels, shrimp, tiny crabs, and  the lapping tongues of mussels moving rhythmically in and out as they fed. Water was a  visceral cellular experience; so I must acknowledge the blessings I learned being connect ed with live moving water. 
Movement, both on land and in water made me happy! As an adult, seeking direct expe rience with healing and the arts, my passion became body mind spirit integration. I loved  movement learning as it was direct, evocative, and also touched the mystery of one’s inner  intelligence. I was fortunate to study directly with with Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen, founder  of the school for Body-Mind Centering (BMC). Thank you Bonnie; your work changed me  from the inside out, and supported me to listen deeply to my own inner and outer body  story. 
Through BMC I met incredible people also drawn to movement; I thank my worldwide  community of BMC practitioners and teachers. Your evolving bodymind intelligence and  dedication helps so many people! BMC brings a finely nuanced knowledge base to the field  of somatic health, expressive arts, and bodymind awareness. I invite BMC colleagues to  use this book as support for bringing people into the water and learning to use water ses 
sions to help more people connect the deeply somatic experience where soul comes into  body. Helping people integrate their “womb matrix” first somatic impressions opens the  place where soul self and bodymind come together at a primal level. Warm water sessions  help people to repattern the earliest experiences of womb time and birth, and reconnect  the soul in order to rest into an embodied satisfaction. 
Thanks to David Sawyer, my colleague and water mentor who introduced me to warm  water therapy as a basis for deep seated psychological/physical healing. David furthered  my dive into the rich world of Perinatal Psychology. The five years of teaching shared in  Switzerland and Washington state helped me hone the methods of this book and bring  BMC-based skills to warm water practitioners. I was always amazed at the increased vi 
tality I saw when participants did perinatal warm water sessions. David’s guidance and  leadership helped so many Watsu practitioners develop much deeper skills of integration.  Thanks David, for allowing me to bring BMC to your students to support deeply integrated  movement! 
I honor my tribe of artists; the movers, contact improvisation folks, hoopers, singer-song writers, actors, vocalists, storytellers, and performers who create outside the box. Sharing  in your playfulness and embodied art nourishes my heart. 
To my other group of friends; those dedicated psychotherapists in Somatics and Perinatal  Psychology worldwide plus all the pioneers interested in awakening consciousness that is 
grounded in reality. Thanks for your efforts in helping people discover themselves more  deeply, release shock, and improve their quality of life.  
Especial appreciation to those who took the deep dive with me; those interns and trainees  who graduated my training program, Bodymind Somanautics, and went on to offer ses sions to clients.  
Thanks to my longstanding and delightful friend, Alexandra Berlin, whose humor, wis dom, and adventurous spirit have nourished my soul. Our “walkabouts” fill me with pleas ure and keep the magic alive. 
Deep and personal gratitude to my family… 
To my mother Florence, whose years of down-to-earth guidance, contagious humor, and  practical heart gave me character. Mom valued learning in nature, and trusted us to learn.  Our swim test at age 6 was to swim the canal from bank to bank and back while she rowed  alongside us giving encouraging words, and watching our skill set! Florence both educated  and trusted her children’s abilities; she allowed us the freedom to grow up and enjoy the  incredible landscape of South Florida waterways and woods. 
To my 2 dad’s: Dick Richardson, who died in the compassionate act of attempting to save  the lives of others, and whose courage and adventurous spirit influence me deeply to this  day. To my stepdad Jim, for providing consistency and the welcome addition of my broth ers. 
To my younger brothers and playmates, Dave and Rick, whose parody of Cheech and  Chong had us in stitches, and whose ongoing brotherly love makes life rich for my heart. 
To my sisters, Nancy and Lynda, who are curious, smart, caring, and affectionate. They  formed a bedrock of play and learning throughout my growing years and hold the ribbons  of our family matrix and family values that believe in love and honoring the whole person. 
Finally, to the children, families, and clients of all ages who helped me develop Aquatic At tachment Therapy. I hope more therapists will use water methods from this book to help  others; including children and families, and especially helping adopted children to bond.  Water helps re-pattern attachment trauma held deeply in the brain stem and cells of chil dren, especially those holding onto any remnant beliefs about being given up for adoption.
Contents 
Foreward 
Introduction 
Overview Section 
Basic Session Skills 
Getting Started Floating A Client The Body-Mind Centering Map Advanced Essential Skills 
Psychological, Emotional, Relational Conclusion 
Appendix

Foreward 
This book is about water healing; how the energy and resonance of warm water sessions  help people! Learn to use the grounded Body-Mind Centering principles coupled with at tachment therapy and perinatal psychology. You don’t have to be a psychotherapist to  enjoy this work, and it makes sense to know some deeper guidelines for water sessions  you offer. 
In 2003 I purchased my own aquatic warm pool set up from a Watsu therapist who sud denly decided to move to Florida. For the next 8 years, I led classes and sessions in the  water. These included prenatal classes for pregnant women and sessions to support preg nant Dads. Dads were guided to float their partners and given the chance to feel the watery  energy transmissions of in-utero baby. It helped them to connect and support the mystery  of their new family. I also developed Aquatic Attachment Therapy, and used the water for  sessions with adults, children, and infants to repair and realign an internalized sense of  safety and trust in the world and life. I did a focused study on the effects of using warm  water therapy to help heal attachment dynamics of adopted children. 
Aquatic therapy helped people to release fear, self-doubts, judgements, and bodymind  shock patterns often unconsciously encoded during the earliest developmental years.  These early experiences form templates that drive adult and child behaviors under stress.  For a deeper understanding of early attachment, perinatal psychology, and working with  shock and trauma, see my book set, Birth’s Hidden Legacy, volume 1 and 2. 
Water is powerful element. It resonates in our cells, and waterwork is very powerful for  the subconscious and psyche. Water can take clients to their depths of soul and earliest  beginning experiences. They can very much help people integrate their past and feel whole  in body, mind, and spirit. 
Some people believe we come from the sea. If you’ve laid on the shore with the water lap ping against you, it’s easy to imagine we crawled out at some point in our developmental  timeline. Whether true, there is nothing more delicious than being belly down at shores  edge, feeling that surging force of water and the slight drag against skin and bones as wa ter ripples back to the sea. Water takes us back to our earliest memories from the womb.  When we integrate these experiences, life is easier. 
“You need only claim the event of your life to make yourself yours. When you truly pos sess all you have been and done, which may take some time, you are fierce with reality” 
— Florida Scott Maxwell
This book is a culmination of my 30 plus years as a somatic psychotherapist, 20 years as a  Body-Mind Centering teacher, and my 15 years in water healing studies. Aquatic Therapy  and Body-Mind Centering is for adults, children, and infants. Water practitioners who  know how to work with the neuroscience of shock and trauma can help clients greatly. You  can help people to recognize and release hypersensitivity, find flexibility, and enjoy life as  their brain moves toward more ease and pleasure. 
Based on hundreds of treatments, methods in this book help you to explore with clients  the places in the bodymind that can bring ease, greater function, and comfort. Treatments  address emotional ease, physical ease, and bring a sense of clarity for the existential self  and soul. 
Skillfully facilitated water work engages the developmental edge where past experi ence,present sensation, and cellular potential meet. Sessions support physical vitality and  a felt sense of potency through movement and fullness.  
At the Brook Institute, our therapists are trained to track early energy of the bodymind  and behavior, exploring attachment dynamics and helping clients to recognize how early  experiences shape behavior; such as overly compliant, resistive, anxious or ambivalent  interactive dynamics, and the accompanying energetic force fields. 
From the watery world of the uterus, to the watery world of our oceans, lakes and streams,  to the water we drink, we all are made of water. I invite you to use this book, explore your  discoveries, and find pleasure in your efforts.
Benefits of Water Sessions 
Water work is a resource unique to itself. While there are overlaps with land methods,  water brings unique vibrational elements of healing, and I encourage all clients to try it at  some point in their therapy. 
Water offers sensory feedback and a felt sense of containment, especially with a skilled  therapist in the warm round pool. Water session support both energy expression and  containment, using movement and stillness. Clients during session often use expressive  movement and later in the session go to a deep still point in when in water.  
The living presence of water opens a deep listening in the brain. Described by many as  womb-like experiences, movement in water appears to re-pattern early imprints and free  alarm patterns locked into the nervous system. This helps metabolize early shock experi ences where the brain stem or core went into a freeze in response to sensory overwhelm.  
Sessions benefit clients of all ages. They release emotions related to pre-cognitive memory  and report significant insights and discoveries. Adopted infants spiral out of confusion and  land in their new parents arms. Mothers who experienced a C-section birth recover po tency and finish that birth push. Children release nameless fears. Adults awaken numbed  instincts held in body tissue, and release inaccurate beliefs related to themselves and the  world that were created under precognitive experiences of stress. Sessions help clear dis torted perceptions from a long ago birth experience, and reclaim liveliness in the body.  
Many people describe sensations related to prenatal memories. If mom smoked, they may  start to smell nicotine, or a woozy feeling related to long ago birth anesthesia. Remarkable  as it sounds, people both smell and taste these substances. I had never smoked, yet during  my water session nicotine smells definitely surfaced!  
Cells do remember experience, and imprints can carry a chemical signature that metab olizes when the experience is met. In Body-Mind Centering, we speak of “sitting in the  synapses,” and “nervous system reversal.” This means that things too overwhelming in  sensory input can store in the body. They backbleed out the sensory nerves and store in  cellular memory and tissue. When there is enough support, as in water sessions, synapses  can uptake and complete the sensory motor processing necessary to integrate the earlier  experience. This explains how deep touch can trigger memories that are precognitive. 
The results of clearing early somatic experiences are amazing. People have more vitality,  more ease, more aliveness, and more integrated responses to life. The movement in the  water helps release cellular memories. One woman came to session reporting she hated  to move and that was a problem because she never wanted to exercise. It turns out her  mother was given two doses of anesthesia at her birth and her cells were still numbing out.  I chose primitive reflexes to help her get beneath the emotional fears of that experience.  Instead of using interventions that included the limbic emotional brain, we simply used 
spinal reflexes of sensory input to motor response. As she regained her instinctive prim itive movement ability, she cleared the synapsis and remembered the heavy experience  of anesthesia imprints from birth. Knowing it was only a moment in time, rather than  “how the world is!” allowed her to regain pleasure in movement. This delighted her, and  she went on to become a teacher of movement classes! Clients who receive water sessions  report an overall impact of realignment of self, reconnection with their body, and an inter nalized sense of safety and trust in life.

About Annie Brook 
I have been on the long road of healing. I’ve had curiosity about my own life, the lives of  clients, and how we as humans find meaning and grace in the world. I been fortunate to  discover amazing teachers and to be an avid seeker of wisdom. I’ve spent over 3 decades  exploring and teaching. I have numerous bodymind and somatic certifications, and been  passionate about giving back what I’ve learned through writing, teaching, facilitating, and  public speaking. The common thread has been awakening body- mind- spirit intelligence.  You can find a description of my personal journey in the appendix.  
Overall, I have spent decades exploring the body using meditation, movement, and Body Mind Centering tools. I returned to crawling as an adult, practiced and learned how to  yield my high tone and rebuild my low tone, and became fascinated with how cells carry  our personal story. 
The understanding of how early experiences shape behavior in the bodymind, and how  conscious movement re-patterns health became my passion.  
Briefly, I am a Somatic Psychologist and author. My books help therapists and somat ic practitioners understand neuroscience and treatment, and share movement practices  based on principles of BodyMind Centering. “Soma” is a greek word for body, and I’ve  been fortunate to have a career that evokes my passion. In my early years in Berkeley, CA, I  volunteered in the infant trauma section of Children’s Hospital. In Seattle and Bellingham,  WA, I taught in public schools and worked in mental health clinics. Prior to Colorado, I  owned Studio Moves in Taos, NM, where I offered Body-Mind Centering sessions, created  movement performances, and taught Contact Improvisation and Playback Theater.  
In Colorado I spent years at Naropa University, where I taught BMC and performance for  the Interarts Department, and also was the Director of Body Psychotherapy for the Mas ters in Somatic Psychology. During this time I obtained my Ph.D. in Somatic Psychology,  and integrated years of treatment experience using movement explorations to understand  the psyche, soul, self, and personality. Upon leaving Naropa, I was asked to start a clinic 
with two colleagues. We collaborated, brought diverse modalities of treatment together  under one roof, and formed Colorado Therapies. We included psychotherapists, Occupa tional Therapists, and Psychologists, practitioners with modalities of EMDR, Brain Gym,  tutoring, Neurofeedback, Cranial Sacral, and manual therapies. During this time I created  The Brook Institute, and spent many years training interns in perinatal and somatic psy chotherapy. 
My love of water work came through assisting David Sawyer in his Prenatal Journey course  for 5 years in Switzerland and Washington state. David pioneered bringing psychothera peutic work to the water, training Watsu aquatic therapists to recognize birth patterns,  dissociation and shock in clients. As both an IBP Trainer (Integrated Body Psychotherapy)  and former student of Dr. William Emerson, a recognized founder of perinatal psychology,  David had much to share. It was a privilege to learn and grow alongside him during those  five years. The work was invaluable. I purchased a warm pool and began working with  adopted children and their parents, plus bringing my regular clients into the pool as part  of psychotherapy. When in Switzerland, I added “How to work with babies” courses, shar 
ing BMC developmental and hands on work, and also led five-day movement awareness  seminars based in principles of BMC. 
The exposure to aquatic therapy was a great gift. It expanded my personal integration and  skills in understanding the journey of soul into body. This early journey, of age 0 to 18  months, including in utero, holds our very first somatic impressions. I learned to translate  BMC pre-vertebrate and vertebral patterns to water work and saw their immediate value.  Warm water sessions bring relief to perinatal imprints. 
During these explorations, I went on to complete a 2 year training course with Myrna  Martin, a protege of Ray Castellino. Myrna, runs her own programs in Canada. Addressing  my premature birth and prenatal imprints helped me to find relief from the isolation and  invasion of NICU experiences. The warm water helped me to feel the strength of my spirit  and soul during those challenging times. 
My doctorate in somatic psychology had a focus on perinatal psychology, developmental  movement, and sacred art and performance. Results from water sessions highlighted their  importance in treatment, and gave me a steadfast appreciation for how water can be used  to heal precognitive experience. With experience and training, practitioners can help cli 
ent’s brains to settle, their cells to metabolize and digest shocking perinatal experiences  that were “a moment in time,” guide clients to help their psyche release false existential  impressions of identity, and help them integrate in order to relax into a more fulfilling and  vibrant life.

Introduction 
Healing the Body Story 
Our earliest imprints exist in the body. These are known as “implicit memories,” buried  deep within the subconscious. When these memories surface in skilled water sessions,  they become “explicit memories.” When these memories are named and understood by a  skilled therapist, or understood inside your own heart, they become “participatory memo 
ry.” This is integrative healing. 
Water is an excellent medium to work with implicit memory. The forcefield of water holds  a presence that supports people during sessions to release pain and fear and learn to trust  their soul. People are amazed when they begin to access body memory encoded from ages  zero to 18 months. These early experiences often formulate behavior responses in the  brain, where the “first protective response” patterns are stored. Water sessions help peo 
ple release the body sensations that contain these early memories. Adding movement ex pression and the ability to contain and work with sensation rather than “escape the body”  brings physical and emotional freedom. Integrating early experiences or traumatic events  through movement in water reduces confusion of self in the world. This integration brings  ease, and lets people get on with life and what they are here to do and enjoy. 
Aquatic work is pleasurable for practitioners too! Therapists can move and to spiral with  the water’s flow. Massage therapists report they can see more clients/week without tiring  their muscles because the water does some of “the work.” Water sessions help people con tact their instinctual “blueprint print” of health. They can repair early attachment and get  support to regulate hyper sensitivities due to early shock or trauma. People even release  ancestral patterns held in their bodies.
Who Benefits from Water Sessions? 
People of all ages 
I have worked in the pool with infants, children, teens, adults, and elders. Water sessions  bring benefit to many people. I have also found the following population niches where  benefit is welcome. 
Pregnant Mothers: Water brings a refined sense of the subtle body. This is especially  useful for pregnant moms to bond with their baby. The water provides movement with  more ease as well. Dads discover they can “sense and feel” their baby more. The couple  becomes more connected with their new adventure into being a family. Holding water  classes for pregnant moms is a great gift. You can order my curriculum for this course at  www.anniebrook.com 
Pregnant couples: Water work is excellent to help Dad’s feel included in the pregnan cy and to connect with their developing infant while in utero. I give one session and teach  Dad floating skills so he can support mom to relax. After that, they book personal time in  the pool. Pool time helps couples bond, relax, and enjoy the vibrations of their little one.  Dads report they feel more connected, feel a sense of awe, and that their heart bursts open  in wonder at being a Dad. 
Adopted infants, children and adults: Babies who change parents after birth  often struggle to attach, even when their adoptive parents are high quality people with  good parenting skills. Adults seeking intimacy and trust in relationship often have an un conscious fear story in their brain and bodymind. I make sure to engage the birth father  memory as well as the birth mother. Water brings these implicit memories to the surface,  and you can help clients integrate and sequence emotions and energy. 
Adopted people have unique early stories: prenatal, birth, often an orphanage  story, and an attachment story. Learning to listen to those layers of early experience helps  repair adoption issues of mistrust or anxious attachment. Since new parents smell and  sound different than the birth mom, it is most useful to go to early senses and perceptions. 
I treated a precocious 6 month old. She would not settle into her new mom’s body until  we spiraled her through the water, bringing up the confusion of orienting in the senses,  and spoke aloud that “wow, this new mom and dad smell and sound different!” The baby  showed confusion and panic for a few seconds, showing us her confusion after birth, and  “where could she orient?” I moved her through the water to bring new sensation to her  skin and relax her panic. Then I spiraled her a few times round, mimicking the sense of  birth rotation, and placed her into her new mom’s arms. There she relaxed and breathed a  deep sigh of relief. After a few moments, she showed a settled interest and curiosity in her  adoptive parents. Her parents were thrilled and reported a lasting change in their daugh ter’s ability to connect after that session.
Water sessions help toddlers and older children release abandonment fears that are deep ly internalized. The primitive brain must release the in utero familiarity of body smells,  skin texture, voice tone, movement rhythms and expressions from the birth mother. Wa ter is such a sensate element and works on many levels that help body-based bonding.  Water sessions help Infants and children recalibrate their brain and accept new input  from adoptive parents. 
I am thrilled with how water sessions help with adoption. One goal of this book is to attract  more therapists to use water therapy to help adopted children. The adoption community  needs support, and adoptive parents are struggling. They are often at their wits end to  combat fears lodged in their child’s primitive experience. Skilled water sessions get to the  root of mistrust. Movement in water allows primitive fears to release and bonding to oc 
cur. For more help with adoption, see my online ebook, The Adoptive Parents Handbook. 
Couples Seeking Trust and Connection: Learning to trust, work through dif ficulties, and engage with a life partner is a big task. Water helps this journey. Couples  learn to connect in nonverbal ways and develop a sense of safety. For some sessions with  couples, I work with each person individually. This helps them release their own imprints  around trust and connection, and not have to drag their partner through their own mate rial. When each person became more clear within themselves, they were better at relation ship. This creates adults who can manage the life task of living a bonded and trustworthy  life of loving another, in a healthy adult manner.
Treatment methods integrated into this manual 
Methods include Body-Mind Centering, perinatal awareness, and early attachment in quiry. This skillful integration makes you a superb therapist and brings great results to  clients of all ages. Apply BMC movement skills to water work to expand practitioner pres ence, listening, observation, and treatment options with clients. Use perinatal knowledge  to help clients tend and befriend unpleasant birth or attachment memories. Clients find  relief as they integrate and name earliest memories; their brain releases confusion and  existential fear. Knowing tenets of attachment therapy helps you guide clients to release  deep rooted issues of anxiety, shame, confusion of self worth, and overly defensive ego  constructs. These blended methods help clients develop a sense of safety and trust in hu man connection. (See my earlier book set, Birth’s Hidden Legacy for a thorough and easy  to use reference guide for perinatal and attachment work). 
Benefits of using Body-Mind Centering skills in water 
BMC keeps practitioners grounded while floating clients. This is key for avoiding back  strain in water work. The BMC developmental movement map for footwork anchors your  feet so you move well without injury. BMC patterns for movement assessment gives a  broad understanding and helps you design movement interventions that bring ease and  integration to clients. BMC prevertebrate patterns help practitioners provide cellular pres 
ence, and access earliest memories for clients. BMC translates easily into the water, and  water itself provides an amazing resource to awaken presence, ease, and consciousness. 
Body Assessment and Hands-On Skills 
Warm-water makes manual assessment of clients easier. Areas of spinal rigidity appear  more easily, and movement blockages can be more easily worked with. I learned to use  underwater support to help clients release deep pre-cognitive fears; they simply went un derwater and held onto my leg as I walked around. The contact with me gave them safety,  and the movement helped them relax. We worked together to meet the sense of a void, or  fear. I asked clients to describe their sensations, and then they went back under and felt  for any fear. Next they came up and we talked about it. I asked them to become curious  about the fear, rather than dissociating. They learned to go under and into the fear space  a bit longer each time, until they could digest and release brain state confusion and beliefs  held there. Often this was related to precognitive experiences held in cellular memory.  Therapists who learn to recognize these overwhelming physical and emotional shock pat 
terns experienced during 0-18 months impression can provide great relief to clients. 
Readers interested in a thorough understanding of perinatal psychology and how to treat  precognitive shock and trauma would enjoy Birth’s Hidden Legacy, Volume 1 and 2. Books  include case studies, treatment charts, clear theory, and somatic interventions. 
Embryology 
Warm water sessions natural evoke womb time experiences. Mindful listening allows  practitioners to build a bridge to prenatal time inquiry. I am in constantly in awe of the  body’s wisdom and determination to heal, tell the body story, and integrate events experi enced during womb time.  
In 1999, colleague Cherionna Menzam was getting her doctorate; she asked me to help  her study embryology using BodyMind Centering methods. (Cherionna graduated Naropa  University, and is now a skilled Cranial Sacral teacher and partner to Franklin Sills). Our  BMC based movement explorations helped me develop the concept of Embryologic Ges 
tures; guided somatic explorations that highlight developmental movements of the em bryo to help people connect with this instinct of health and support.
The Embryological Journey Exercise is a guided somatic exploration using the accuracy  of embryological development. (found in my book, From Conception to Crawling, Smart Body Books, 2000). Readers can re-pattern prenatal experience, using this exercise as a  nourishing template that might contrast with a less optimal emotional, physical, and psy chological womb experience.  
Returning to the natural blueprint of health found in embryological gestures awakens a  “health of the organism” that repairs imprints from early times. Many years after writing  this exploration work, I assisted Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen in her BMC course on Embry ology and Yoga, which is another exquisite way to bring ease to earliest embodiment.  
Opening the psychological, emotional, relational, and physical brings one to the matrix  of consciousness and health. Currently I am pondering how ambivalent attachment may  occur in the internuncial nerves which bridge sensory and motor input to the brain. I pro pose that a freeze response related to need shock in the spinal cord interrupts the sensory  motor loop, and creates the struggle around reaching and taking hold of connection. Am bivalent attachment is difficult to treat, and this may bring relief. Since water sessions take  people back to the fluidity of embryological learning, I am also exploring how “stem-cell”  consciousness can repattern health. Body consciousness and BMC skills offer many ways  to explore integrative health. Bringing these to water sessions provides a great opportuni ty for inquiry.
Background Development of Aquatic Work 
Body Story, Cellular Story 
I like to treat at the matrix of psyche and body, the place where humans make meaning  of experience. My psychological background is based in experiential methods that allow  me to explore in a somatic manner the human connection and response to experience.  Humans are designed to make meaning; how that meaning is made and reflected, told  internally and externally as story, and how it creates beliefs that also shape culture, is my  passion.  
Treating the matrix experience is richly demanding. You must find the sensory motor sen sations, brain, body, tissue, and ANS responses to overwhelm, meet the rarified energies  of soul and spirit with perinatal development, and discover how issues of protection, aban donment and invasion shape identity beliefs. These are the personal stories of clients. 
I study these stories. They are the unique life stories of each of us; my clients, myself, you.  Look at how body story shapes self, how self creates meaning, and in health, experiences  become integrated. Integration of experience supports an empowered sense of self, pro motes satisfaction in life, and helps people live within a cohesive personal narrative.  
Years of client session work, plus years of study with master teachers in skills related to  bodymind awareness, experiential learning, and the creative process, have given me a rich  pallet of skills. My certification studies include: embryology, perinatal therapy, cranial  sacral and visceral manipulation skills, a host of somatic and clinical psychology methods,  Body-Mind Centering with a specialty in infant development, my years as a Heartsong  minister teaching Sufi meditations, doctoral yantra studies, plus the movement healing  arts, such as Jin Gui Chi Gung, Kaiut Yoga, Gyrokinesis, and Gyrotonics. 
Body-mind studies include the developmental brain that forms during infancy and be yond; understanding how the special sensory processes of the face and head are perceptu al kinesthetic building blocks in preparation for academic readiness, and later life problem  solving. I’ve learned to listen for brain state expression, and encourage clients to open to  neuroplasticity of the brain in order to repattern.  
Aquatic work has proved a wonderful additional resource for clients. May it enhance your  journey as well. My hope is that you will help others by offering skillful water work ses sions. Let us look more specifically at how to use this book. 
How to Use this Book… 
This book is organized into sections that provide theory, skills, and professional specifics  to get started as a water therapist. Learn the groundwork for body positioning as a prac titioner, how to float a client, and explore advanced theory on perinatal experiences, rela 
tional and emotional issues, and how one creates meaning and a sense of self. • Overview: Overview, reflective thoughts, and guidelines about water work and  respectfully working with clients. 
• Basic Session Skills: Footwork basics, mechanics of weight, and props. 
• Getting Started Floating a Client: Attunement, boundaries, and transi tions. 
• The Body-Mind Centering Map: BMC patterns and specific practices  to support your developmental map of the body. Group explorations, outdoor  beach play, and making your own moves. 
• Advanced Essential Skills: These make your sessions rich and rewarding. 
• Psychological, Emotional, Relational: Attachment issues, shock pat terns, and power struggles. How to attune, and understand dynamics and pacing  of sessions.  
• Appendix: Intake and session forms, Annie’s story, checklists, and case study  articles.

Overview Section 
People have turned to water for support since the beginnings of time. It would be naive of  modern practitioners to think our forbearers did not know the healing properties of water.  Indigenous cultures worldwide have had sacred healing springs, ritual bathing, and puri fication rites. This connection with water is an innate need, both physically and spiritually.  
In recent times, Dr. Masaru Emoto, author of The Hidden Messages in Water, has trave led the world, guiding people in purifications and healing rituals for people and the planet. 
Mineral springs were sources of comfort for the soul and body. Water was used to bring  support to birthing. While visiting Hawaii, I searched for an ancient birthing rock where it  was said that women squatted in the lower tides, and used the healing waters of the ocean  to help them labor. In Russia, modern Midwives host a summer birthing camp along the  Black Sea, as well as assist women to birth in indoor tubs in the winter months. In Bel 
gium, the Ostend Clinic founded by Michele O’Dent, offers doctor assisted water births in  a warm water tub. This clinic has a “home feel” setting, with all the essential emergency  equipment housed quietly behind cupboards. Doctors there enjoy the slower pace allowed  for birthing, rather than the normal hospital setting, and the ability to attend the full pro 
cess of a mother’s birth. In addition, this clinic offers prenatal water classes and classes  after birth to support parents to bond with their infant. Women are flocking to the Ostend  clinic and these water methods, especially after having a discouraging medical birth expe rience in other hospitals. 
Warm pool aquatic therapy evolved further in the 1980’s through Watsu, and in the 1990’s  therapists began to include warm water perinatal psychology work. Now many practition ers have added warm pool therapy to their treatment skills. I give gratitude for the teach ers who developed these works and encourage you to take their courses as well as use the  materials in this book.
Modern history of aquatic bodywork 
In the early 1980s Harold Dull, (director of the Harbin School of Shiatsu and Massage in  northern California), began to apply the stretches and moves of Zen Shiatsu in warm wa ter. In the years since, with the help of countless others in classes, clinics and spas around  the world, Watsu has evolved into a leading edge Aquatic Therapy. It has also served as  a source of inspiration and impetus for several other forms of water therapy, which have  developed either alongside or directly out of the ‘Watsu experience’. Three of the most  prominent forms are Waterdance, Healing Dance, and Jahara Technique. 
Waterdance or Wasser Tanzen (WATA) was developed by Arjana Brunschwiler  and Aman Schroter in 1987. After being stretched and relaxed above water, the client is  then given a nose plug and gradually and gently taken entirely under the water. Moves are  timed with the breathing and incorporate elements of massage, Aikido-like moves, dol 
phin and snake-like waves, rolls, somersaults, inversions and dance. Influenced by Trager  and dance, Alexander Georgeakopoulos’ Healing Dance is a creative blend of both Wat su and Waterdance. It incorporates more dynamic stretches, spacious movements and  dance-like elements, with a strong focus on flow, rhythm, and 3 dimensional movements  both above and underwater. 
Jahara Technique is a particularly peaceful and gentle form of Aquatic Therapy. De veloped by Mario Jahara, it emphasizes support, including the use of flotation devices.  Providing continual gentle traction, it stresses the importance of spinal alignment, gentle  bodywork, muscular release and the concept of expansion.  
Watsu and all the above therapies are represented by WABA: The Worldwide Aquatic  Bodywork Association. This is an educational non-profit organization based in Califor nia. It is dedicated to making the benefits of both giving and receiving Aquatic Bodywork  available to everybody. It maintains a worldwide Registry of students, practitioners and  instructors. (http://www.watsu.org.nz/index.php?page=history-of-watsu).
Water to support birthing: A personal decision 
Frances LeBoyer popularized water births with his book, Birthing in Water. A Russian  teacher, Igor Charkovsky, helped his daughter to heal by returning her to water. He went  on to help mothers deliver babies in bathtubs using water. Now many US hospitals offer  birthing rooms with birthing tubs, and home tubs are available for birthing. There is a  large movement in Russia by dedicated midwives who help mothers to birth at home or in  nature at a summer camp they host at the Black Sea during summer months. You can find  information about them online.  
Water can create a peaceful birth; however, for some this is too relaxing. There are also  risks, especially if the infant is improperly handled so they simultaneously ingest both  both air and water following the birth. I worked with one infant who suffered some per manent difficulties due to this. For many, water birthing has been a wonderful experience  with a highly positive outcome. Children seem connected and deeply relaxed in their core. 
Some cranial therapists believe water birth masks the necessary “ignition force” in the cer ebral spinal fluid which prepares one to meet gravity and pressure in life. Being able to feel  proprioception is a necessary task for development of later academic readiness. I encour age pregnant couples to be sure to do their research and see what appeals to their instincts.
Water for Group Explorations  
Contact Improvisation 
Movement artists and dancers are bringing water work into community healing events,  and for play and community building. The organization Liquid Flow offers week-long re treats with water and dance. Beintouch.US organizes aquatic dance events and healing  rituals. There is a growing interest in water sessions for movement healing and play, and  an increasing demand for water options in movement retreats. 
Body-Mind Centering 
Body-Mind Centering practitioners are adding water work to their skill sets. This book was  written to support that movement and is steeped in BMC methods. See the subsequent  chapters that are devoted to water skills based in principles of BMC.
How to Begin Aquatic Therapy 
Play around in water 
There is nothing to interrupt your curiosity and discoveries of water work. You need only  to begin. If you find yourself passionate about the healing potentials and can see adding  this to your skill offerings, then please go on to get professional training. 
Engage as a Professional with your Interest 
Whether your interest is personal or professional, you can trust in the healing properties  of water. Find your own way, which may have a sacred component as well as professional.  Notice the books you are drawn to, how your spirit engages when you work, what happens  with your dreams, and what you bring to clients. 
Remember not to “spiritualize” your client’s experiences! While there is potential for a  soul and spirit integration in water, be aware that many people drawn to water work have  a tendency to repeat shock experiences, or want to stay “out of body,” addicted to the relief  that dissociation provides or simply unfamiliar with meeting the pressure of embodiment.  
Some people project “dolphin magic” into their experience. This too can be dissociative.  Allow pleasure and interrupt projections. Allow the mystery and enjoyment of opening  perceptions, while still providing clients with ways to recognize and interrupt shock and  trance states. (See Birth’s Hidden Legacy, by this author).  
Ignorance about dissociative shock was one of the reasons David Sawyer began his wa ter therapist training program mentioned earlier. Dissociation and magical thinking can  indicate unresolved parasympathetic shock where one has learned to engage a spiritual ized “bypass” of threat, rather than an integration of early experience. For scared infants,  children or adults, the psyche is designed to leave the body under what appears to be  life threatening circumstances. Integrative work means helping clients come to resolution  with early forces and release restrictions in the bodymind. Skilled water therapy can help  with this. 
Be an engaged witness to what emerges for clients. Offer reading suggestions and support  without romanticising or joining clients in trance states when in the water. Water is a se ductive medium as it transmits forces easily. Please review the section on Need Shock and  dissociative states in Birth’s Hidden Legacy. See also the Aquatic Attachment Therapy  section of this book. 
Get Proper Training 
Some people are natural water therapists and offer sessions for pleasure. Others want to  add water work to their profession. There are skills needed in either case. You will be able  to provide even greater integration and enjoy what water offers with skill training. Profes-
sional development is highly recommended for water work. See the resources listed in the  appendix and the following checklist to make sure you have what you need to get started  in water sessions.
Checklist for Your Aquatic Skills 
1. Paperwork and insurance in place. 
2. Intake and injury assessment. Skin lesion query. 
3. Footwork and alignment skills. 
4. How to open and close a session; holding the container for a session from begin ning, to middle, and end. 
5. Verbal skills. 
6. Movement and touch skills: BMC developmental map. 
7. Knowledge of shock and how to recognize trance and dissociation. 8. Observational skills. 
9. Perinatal awareness skills. 
10. Attachment theory understanding, and holding a container for bodymind and re lational healing. 
11. Listening to the muse and getting out of the way. 
12. Follow up guidelines. 
As a therapist, your client will feel most secure in your holding of them when you have  good spinal alignment and proper foot placement in your body. Keep a clear sense of your  midline and integrated vertical spine when floating others. You can hurt your back if your  feet are not aligned and supporting you as you move a client. Mario Jahara has excellent  classes on footwork. I use the BMC developmental map as the basis for alignment and foot  placement.
Supportive reflections on water work skills 
Perception and Sense of Self 
Water work helps sensory integration in the brain. Our sensory modalities shape our world  in early life; touch, taste, smell, balance, pressure, skin tactile, auditory, visual, kinesthet ic, and energetic. Perception is how we know ourselves, and this development of “self” is a  physiological, relational, and psychological process. It is a bodymind experience. 
Perception is basic to our understanding of the world. How we encode early experience  and make meaning of it stores in the body tissues and cells. These early experiences are  the initial matrix of identity formation. We are learning to perceive outside the womb at  the same time we are organizing a basic sense of self. This is the reason early experience  carries such weight in our internal organizing of self, other, and world. 
If we explore further, we include neuroception (nervous system’s quick response organ izer of safety), interoception (our “internal regulation” response for detecting respiration,  hunger, heart rate, and the need for digestive elimination), and proprioception (the ability  to feel weight and pressure, organize self in relation to gravity, and know where we are in  time and space). Proprioception sends information through the joints. These perception  senses all start in the womb; proprioception is supportively activated through the pres sures of birth. Together, these neural perceptions shape a basic homeostasis, or comfort in  the ability to regulate both the inner and outer perceptions of one’s world.  
Epigenetics and neuroscience are affirming what perinatal psychologists and infant devel opmental specialists have understood for years; that experiences of the bodymind include  prenatal and ancestral influences, and they shape the ability to regulate sensations back to  comfort. This book organizes skill sets to help you meet these regulatory needs of clients.  Knowing you are working at a potential of early identity matrix can allow sessions to be  deeply interesting.  
Most of all, with water work, become curious. Learn to enjoy the unknown in your work.  Bring presence and knowledge to what you are seeing, and guide your clients’ expression  toward integration. 
Developmental Layers 
In Body-Mind Centering, we speak of integration from the bottom up, meaning from the  lower developmental patterns to the more advanced. This is how the brain is designed to  work most efficiently, and early crawling supports this integration. I use the developmen tal map to teach spinal integration and foot placement for the aquatic therapist. (See From  Conception to Crawling for more detailed information to understand developmental the ory and for interventions on land).
Find the Path of Ease 
Movement patterns start in utero and repeat throughout birth and early development. The  BMC developmental patterns help realign and interrupt habits that interfere with ease.  They form the building blocks for quality athletic ability and help clients regain balance  prior to shocking events that interrupted the bodymind capacity and brain integration.  Use prevertebrate (prenatal) patterns to connect a client with their health through vibra 
tion and cellular breathing. A spinal pattern interrupted at birth can be healthy and strong  in utero. Return to the place of ease and strength as a resource before meeting difficulty.  Find memory of ease in order to face a difficult birth, neonatal intensive care hospital ex perience, or infant surgery. This may mean finding the energies of pre birth connection to  spirit and soul which water work support. Start with current events with adult and child  clients, and work backward toward reclaiming early resources. 

Basic Session Skills 
Footwork 
Knowing where to place your feet makes water work easier. Proper alignment when mov ing someone around in the water is essential to avoid injury to your back, especially with  larger clients. Practice these footwork body positions repeatedly so they are instinctive.  Refer to next section “The Body-Mind Centering Map,” for terms and details. 
Spinal Support 
1. Stand upright in the water. Bend your knees and feel how the water bobs you up  and down as you breathe. Take time to attune your breath and movement before  you begin a session. 
2. Practice attuning to the water and yourself by sitting on a noodle like a swing. Play  with the movement that occurs through your breath. Notice how you can balance  or fall forward or back, depending on your vertical spine. 
Homologous Feet 
(integration of uppers and lower limbs into spine, like a frog homologous pattern) 1. Stand with your feet parallel; “upper limbs to tail, lower limbs to head”. 
2. Lean back in the water, falling gently backwards. Wait to the last minute to take  a step.  
3. Practice walking backward and each time returning to homologous parallel feet.  Learn to use this backward momentum when moving a client, rather than your  muscles.  
4. Always return your feet so you organize through homologous, before you change  directions or into another step. Homologous grounds your spine and protects  your back from injury due to proper alignment and use of feet. 
Homolateral Feet 
lateral flexion, like a salamander in motion:integrates one-side (spine & limbs), then the  other side (spine & limbs) 
1. Start in homologous, with feet parallel. Now fall directly sideways, taking a side step. Pivot your front foot into the side direction. Travel the pivot through your 
leg into pelvis and rotate until you are facing both feet in a lunge into that side  direction (similar to the warrior stance in yoga).  
2. When pivoting, allow your arms to flow out in front of you to letting the energy of  your feet move all the way to your hands. 
3. Repeat on the other side.  
Note: If same side arm and leg are flexed when holding a client’s head, it is a “homolat eral” effort. 
Contralateral 
(Diagonal support through the trunk and limbs; how a horse or dog moves) 
1. Fall back from homologous. Side step and pivot into a homolateral with forward  arm and forward leg connected energetically. 
2. Continue spiraling the spine and rotating until you feel the forward arm connect ing all the way through the core to the back leg. This brings in diagonal support  from front arm to back leg. 
3. Grasp a pool “noodle” in the forward hand to emphasize the sensation.  4. Continue spiraling and return from contralateral movement back to homologous.
Skills Practice with Noodle 
Changing Directions with Footwork Support 
Practice the above footwork in each direction. Alternate which foot side steps and return  to homologous. Practice stopping in vertical, and bend your knees slightly to stabilize  yourself. 
Head support for the client using noodle 
Proper hand placement, using momentum and leverage makes head support easier.  
Exercise 1: Both hands holding head: Grasp a noodle with both hands and imagine you  are supporting a client’s head. Fall back into homologous and walk backwards, using mo mentum to “float” your imaginary client. Practice falling back and learn to use the water to  reduce effort in your movement. 
Exercise 2: Head support with your elbow: Use a noodle to simulate, then practice  with a friend. 
1. Start in Homologous with the noodle in front of you.  
2. Reach your right hand under client’s neck (the noodle) and wrap it back on top of  their far shoulder (noodle on elbow, extending in front of you).  
3. Press down with open palm and straight wrist against their shoulder (noodle). Do  not flex your wrist!  
4. Use this leverage as needed to secure a client’s head.  
5. Make sure your arm is under their occiput, not neck. 
6. Do not let client’s head fall back. Keep a nice flexion in the neck!  
Exercise 3: Bring head from both hands to your elbow using momentum. 
Fall back into homologous. As you sidestep in the direction of your client’s head, bring  their head to your elbow. Continue moving in this direction as you follow momentum.  Change your inner connection from homolateral to contralateral as you spiral around. Al ways move in the direction of client’s head unless using underwater foot holds and spring ing out. Moving in the direction of feet can feel unsettling to clients when floating.
Neck Head Support Holds 
(from the brilliant Jahara training) 
1. Sit on the steps of a pool, or with back against the pool side for stability. Cup the  head and slowly slowly, follow the micromovements that start to emerge. This  quiet slow time often produces small tension release jerks as the body deeply re laxes. It is highly effective for the nervous system relaxation. 
2. A second head hold: sit or stabilize yourself standing. Cross your forearms and  bring palms down onto each shoulder so head rests nicely on your arms. Press  down slowly, following the expansion and release of your client’s breath.  
Depth of Your Shoulders in the Water 
Clients are lighter and easier to move if you sink lower into the water.  1. Bend your knees and practice keeping the water at chest height.  
2. If your shoulders are straining or coming toward your ears, sink lower in the wa ter. This provides better leverage with a client. 
3. Practice with the noodle, keeping even motions as you move about the pool. 
Additional Noodle Practice for Learning how to support Head through  Spine 
Proper elbow placement is essential for ease in holding and supporting a client’s head.  Make sure you are low in the water, and their face is in the water up to their ears or includ ing the ear. This maintains a flexion, or “c shaped” curve in their neck. 
1. Stand in homologous with elbows bent, and widen across your back. You arms  look like this: < > 
2. Take a noodle and push it down with both hands. Simultaneously, bend both el bows and keep them just below the water surface.  
3. Keep one arm bent under an imaginary client’s head, with palm on “shoulder.”  This will be your “forward arm.” 
4. Continue to feel the width across your back.  
5. Do not let the head drop back across your elbow! Keep client’s neck flexed so head  and spine are connected. 
6. Give a slight traction to the entire spine.  
With practice you can feel the entire spinal length of your client in a nice c curve simply by  holding the head correctly.
Practice feeling your hand adjust to making contact with the noodle and giving firm pres sure with a straight wrist. The hand must be firm against the shoulder, press slightly down  in order to keep leverage and use momentum in order to add movement and keep the head  secure. New therapists are often too tentative with the hand placed on the shoulder. Please  be firm and practice using this leverage. It will save your back in water work! 
Circle Practice 
1. Once you have the spine and footwork, practice being able to walk 
2. Walk around in a flowing circle, always going through the homologous for sup port.  
3. Lean backwards as you walk backwards, using the pressure of the water to sup port you. 
Changing the head from one arm to the other, and direction of move ment.  
This is a graceful tai chi movement when you use the momentum of the water. Practice  changing sides and direction with your client “noodle.” 
1. Start in homologous, holding the “head” of the client. 
2. Fall back in the water, pivot left into homolateral with client head in left elbow,  pressing palm down onto their “shoulder” for leverage.  
3. Maintain contact using wide back, long elbow, straight wrist, and flat palm. 
4. Continue in the direction of the turn, using momentum to swing the “client’s feet”  away from you.  
To Shift Sides: You must use momentum! 
5. While moving, lower your elbow in the water. Release the client’s shoulder and  slide that hand palm up under their head. 
6. Bring your other hand also palm up under their head as you move to homologous  feet.  
7. Support the occiput of the skull and walk backwards in the water. Use momentum  in backward motion to keep the “body” parallel and floating. 
8. Use this momentum to change sides. Pivot your hips into homolateral as you  bring your clients head into your right elbow, hand upon their shoulder. Secure  contact using wide back, long elbow, straight wrist, and flat palm. 
9. Move toward the right through the water.
To recap: practice going backward with momentum, holding the head with both hands.  Pause in homologous foot placement, and pivot into homolateral foot on the opposite side,  This brings client’s head into your opposite elbow. Place that hand firmly on the shoulder  and continue moving in this new direction. 
Props 
Floats 
Leg Floats: Noodles or individual leg floats? 
Watsu uses individual leg floats, Jahara uses a noodle. I have both available and alternate  sometimes in the same session.The noodle under the client’s knees with proper head sup port gives amazing traction to the spine and you can assess alignment. Go slowly to allow  deep quiet; a good way to start with clients who need this. 
For those who need more movement at the beginning, I use leg floats. This allows clients  the ability to kick the legs individually and get movement through the hips and spine.  
Neck Floats 
The main concern using neck floats is that the head not fall back, interrupting spinal inte gration of the head and body. The neck and head house our special senses, cranial nerves,  and the big Vagus nerve that governs emotional safety and protective responses. I mostly  use neck floats when I am floating myself. I use a noodle, or a styrofoam filled tube with  pillow, or the blow up air floats.  
Leg Weights 
I don’t recommend them. With proper footwork and alignment, I can move large men  around in the water with ease. It is the use of momentum and footwork. Leg weights can  give a false sense of ground and people get away with poor foot placement. That said some  people have a very floaty body, and claim they need weights to keep themselves down. If  you use weights pay attention to your knees and do not torque your ankles or spine. Proper  alignment is still key. 
Nose Clips  
There are a variety of shapes and sizes available. Be sure to have nose clips on hand for  underwater work. I keep a clip on the strap of my bathing suit so I can hand it to clients if  a session evolves into underwater work. 
In all underwater work, the trick is in pacing the client’s breathing so you don’t bring them  up too early, or wait too long. Use a signal for a client to roll from belly up to going under water, such as: “take a big breath and rotate your head when they are ready to go under.” 
Underwater nose holds: Some clients prefer to hold their own nose if you have no clip  or they are too sensitive to use one. Another hold which I prefer(as do some clients), is  for me to hold a client’s nose so their hands are free. This demands a sensitive pacing and  attunement. Be sure to practice with a friend before trying this professionally. 

Getting Started Floating A Client 
Be Practical 
Make sure your your insurance is in place, your liability waiver is signed, including the  statement about open skin wounds. Make sure to verbally ask about skin lesions or open  sores as well. Infections spread in water. I have had clients eager to get in a pool “forget”  to talk about skin lesions. Although it is awkward to address this, you must become used  to it. You can always reschedule. 
A good intake and introduction is important. Find out a client’s desires for the session  outcome, and if they have fears related to water. See the appendix for some examples of  intakes. 
Start with Attunement and Cellular Breathing 
1. Start standing, facing your client, each of you in a homologous stance a little bit  apart. Help them to attune to the water. 
2. Notice if they are comfortable and teach them to feel how their breathing influ ences their movement in the water. 
3. Have them place one foot forward, and bend their knees, as in a lunge position. 
4. Have them rotate in the water, feeling their arms flowing and the water against  their movement. 
5. Make sure they wake up their hips as they rotate side to side and get comfortably  “warmed up” prior to a session.
Contact Boundaries 
Assessment and Permission Prior to Floating 
When working consciously with energy, and specifically with safety and trust, I use a spa tial boundary game. The client chooses how close I come to them, and can direct me for ward and back with their hand. attachment specifically, I ask the client to choose the dis tance from me that is most comfortable. We slowly work with coming into contact. I have  
spent sometimes an entire session only on this issue of trust and proximity. • Start with client back against the pool wall so they are supported. 
• Talk about energy and how we can feel things in the body. 
• Tell client you are going to explore with them, and they will direct how close you  come. 
• Ask them to use their hands to invite you forward or back, and to stop you the  second they feel something. 
• Stand across the round pool or a good distance away. 
• Be completely in neutral energy as you await their invitation. 
• Move slowly forward, breathing so there is not extra tension in you • Stop the second they gesture and wait. Breathe 
• Do this forward and back until you are in contact 
• Talk with them about what they noticed 
• Especially notice if they bring you too close too fast
How to Start Floating 
With some clients, I start floating with a noodle, and do subtle work before switching to  leg floats for more stretches and moves. Movement energizes the body. Subtle work helps  with attunement. I move between subtle and vigorous movements, depending on the cli ent’s expression and needs.  
Transition from standing to floating 
1. Again, start with client standing in homologous.  
2. Face them, ask them to deepen their breathe and notice how the water supports  the movements of their body. You can also take their hands and breathe with  them. 
3. Move to stand beside them, perpendicular so you are facing their side body. 
4. Take a lunge stance with your forward knee bent as a ledge for them to sit on. *Do  not face them as they sit! 
5. Place a noodle under their legs 
6. Simultaneously reach over their back and place your open palm on their opposite  shoulder for leverage 
7. As they lean back, secure the head and place your other hand on the outer edge of  the noodle. 
8. Lift the noodle and move backward in the water so they are floating 9. Adjust your position and begin your leg work movement 
10. Follow the flow of the water, using the footwork patterns. 
*Having a client face you to sit means they are literally sitting on your lap! This is too inti mate a position in water work, especially for male therapists with female clients. Although  this move is taught in Watsu training, do not do this! 
Unfortunately, I heard about a male water water therapist accused of sexual abuse during  a session due to using this frontal facing start position. He was sued and went to jail! Don’t  put yourself at risk. The body carries the story of past trauma, and psychological issues can  arise. It was highly likely that past memories had surfaced and his female client went into  a shock pattern related to past abuse. This therapist was not aware, and could offer the  client no context for what was occurring in her psyche. 
When in doubt, always stop the work and inquire. Stand the person up. Ask them what  they are noticing. Do not go into a floating trance state if you feel strong sexual energy  arising. Ask the client if they have any knowledge of sexual abuse. Tell them you are no-
ticing this energy surfacing and reinstate how “you do not engage sexually with clients in  any manner.” Be curious together about this energy, and name it as perhaps a past energy  arising. Doing so puts you in alignment with the client, not seen as the perpetrator. Seek  supervision as needed. 
With certain issues, it is highly recommended to have a psychotherapist on hand for re ferral so you can collaborate in helping a client heal. Unfortunately, some water trainings  offer little understanding of boundaries, abuse, and projections that can surface in water  work. Do not you put yourself in jeopardy or over extend your desire to help others.  
Subtle breath work supporting the head 
1. Stand facing your clients head, as they are supported by floats. 
2. Cross your elbows, place your hands on each shoulder, and keep elbows low in  the water. 
3. Use the leverage of your hands and elbows to support the client and follow their  breath 
4. Notice the inhale, exhale and gently push down as they exhale, and rise up as they  inhale. 
This intervention helps the body feel your attunement and brings them into deeper aware ness. Use movement to lubricate the spine and give clients a sense of flow. After the body  is awake and energized, you can go to the BMC map for more subtle work that addresses  spinal connection, and heart, head, gut, and breath.

The Body-Mind Centering Map 
Once you know how to begin, you can explore and modify your water moves. A good way  to start is to use the Body-Mind Centering Developmental Map which follows. It is a won derful anatomy and tissue guide for for use in water moves. (See my book, The Developing  Infant, for a thorough explanation of infant development in stages).  
To support yourself or clients to attune to the body, start with tissue tone and use the  Preverterate Patterns in water. Tone can support or diminish one’s ability to engage in life  with ease. 
Tone Assessment 
Water therapy is often used to help muscles relax, find fluidity, and reduce physical pain.  Water sessions can help clients to reduce a kind of inner bracing, known as high tone. It  can also help clients gather energy, and build power and tone. Tissues should be resilient,  not braced or taught as in high tone, nor flaccid and floppy, as in low tone. 
Tone development starts in utero in relationship to water, and continues post birth  through infancy and early childhood in relationship to gravity. It supports movement in  all the planes. 
Tone is the texture of body tension or relaxation. It influences all tissues, body systems,  and fluids, not just muscles. Tone can be too low, known as hypo-tone, or too high or  tense, known as hyper-tone. When tone is too high or low, movement is impaired. Tone  can be taut or inert at the extremes. Balanced tonus allows the tissues to be responsive and  available for movement. 
Tone is so important for the body that it develops as a primitive reflex, the “Tonic Labryn thine.” Reflexes don’t need to travel up to the brain but respond at the level of the spine. 
A tonal baseline is usually well established prior to teen years. Infants born prematurely  often have tissue tone difficulties, and can be supported by caregivers who know how to  pattern in a balanced tone. Make sure infants are not braced or rigid, or flaccid, feeling  more vacant and hyper-mobile. 
Tone imbalances can be assessed via touch and movement observation, as well as self  awareness practices. As you assess clients general tone, also assess different parts of the  body for tone balance. Perhaps your client is high tonus in the torso and low tonus in the  belly, or high tonus in the muscles and low tonus in the organs. The joint fluids can have a  tonal quality, as can the brain and nervous system.
Educate clients about tissue tonus and help them find balance. Have them practice active  yield between sessions so they become familiar with that in between place that is neither  high or low tone. There are a number of ways to increase tone that are helpful. 
Tone Awareness Exercises 
First, as a water practitioner, assess your own level of tone. Use the resistance of the water  to bring awareness. Notice if you speak quickly and your brain moves faster than your  body. That could indicate a tendency to high tone. Notice if you are more depressive, or  slow to respond. That could indicate a need to gather more tone for an easier response  time. 
1. Learn the felt sense of a balanced tone. Practice at home with gravity. 2. Lie on the floor on your belly 
3. Make yourself taut, rigid. Lift your head and notice your emotional and breath  response. Notice how your eyes change, perhaps becoming more suspicious. 
4. Make yourself low tone, like a broken water balloon with no membrane. Feel the  blah, lack of energy of low tone. Notice if you are even able to lift your head. 
5. Play back and forth until you can feel the middle. When you find the “rest within  activity” and “the activity within rest,” you will have energy. See how easy it is to  support yourself on your forearms as you lift your head. Notice how easy it is to be  curious about what is around you. 
If you are high or low tonus, you will be less supportive to your client, especially in the wa ter. If low tonus, increase your tone just enough to provide resistance with a yielded sense  underneath, rather than bracing. If high tonus, breathe and relax, let go of effort or trying  to be the “perfect” therapist or to “fix” your client. 
Float your partner and notice if they are overly taut. This can indicate a high tone, or a high  outer tone with possibly low inner tone. If your partner is flaccid and “drifts away” this can  indicate an inability to hold an energetic charge, or a low tonus. 
1. To increase or decrease tone, use full body flexion/extension. 
2. Work against the ladder to help fold them into compression to both relax and then  build tissue tone. 
3. Curl your client into a ball, with the back of their head against your chest, their  feet on the ladder or side of the pool, and their spine curved. Place one of your  knees under their tailbone so they have a “shelf” and they can gently curl and  push, like priming a pump. 
4. Once the potency has built up, ask them to push out and kick and splash with  their legs. When they push, you duck under the water to get out of the way! They 
will float over you and start kicking. This is a wonderful way to encourage their  connection to life force, potency, and movement. It can also help clear numbness  and birth anesthesia by returning potency to the push. 
In floating a client, use condensing/expanding movements head to tail. The water’s nat ural fluidity and long flowing movements increase cellular breath and release taught or  guarded tissues. 
1. Hold a noodle under their knees while you use the head hold support of your bent  elbow under their head. 
2. Leverage them into flexion and back out to extension.  
3. With individual leg floats, hold your arm under their knees and curl them into a  ball with your body movements.  
4. Release their legs, let the movement in the water open them out, then reverse di rection so you are placing them on your opposite shoulder and flex again.  
Another good way to explore was recommended by Damian Leuthold, a Brook Institute  water therapist and facilitator. Damian suggests using the physioballs in the water, letting  people explore curling around them belly to the ball, to find full spinal supported flexion.  This is good when working with groups of people so more people can feel at once. 
Primitive Reflexes in the Water 
Reflexes are the “alphabet of movement.” They occur as the first sensing into moving re sponses, and are protective. Reflexes do not have to be “thought about,” they do not travel  up to the brain for evaluation but simply cross the spine in a reflex arc from sensation to  movement. 
Reflexes are extremely useful to engage people with movement. I use them in the water  because clients can feel the water resistance. Evoking them in this manner demands a bit  more “pressure/scratch” due to the density of water. I often start with a client’s neck re flexes since that is above water to engage the nervy responsiveness of reflexes. 
1. Have a client stand with their back against the pool. 
2. Explain how reflexes can open up blocked response and free the body for more  efficient movement. 
3. Ask permission, and then tickle your client’s neck. Or, have them tickle their own  neck. It is better for you to do as they will be more reflexive. 
4. Tickle each side, and then front, and back. Make sure they flex the neck in re sponse in each direction. 
5. Use grasps of the hands and feet.  
6. Add flexor withdrawal and extensor thrust of the arms and legs. 
You can view reflexes on youtube. However, for a thorough teaching of Primitive Reflexes,  see my 3 DVD set, From Conception to Crawling. It shows how to teach reflexes. The ac companying book also gives full a description. 
I make sure to use reflexes during a series of sessions to bring pleasure and ease of move ment. They are essential to assist recovery from anesthesia imprints.
BMC Prevertebrate Patterns 
It is useful to have a felt sense or map to guide your work in sessions. I include the map I  use, which is a blend of Body-Mind Centering (BMC) that highlights development 
from the womb through infancy to upright walking. In BMC, we see development as layers  of awareness. We look at the “alphabet of movement,” and body systems in a language that  helps OT’s, PT’s, and manual therapists to have an integrated sense of the body. 
I think of earliest movement as embryological gestures. These prenatal movement pat terns are active inside the womb. Use them to wake up tissue awareness, find organic  movement, and bring breath to the cells. Practice each pattern for yourself on land or  when in the water so you get a felt sense of what you are helping a client to feel. You can  use 2 noodles; one to support your head and your knees. 
Prevertebrate patterns bring ease into body tissues and the bodymind. They awaken “stem  cell” memory and organic tissue organization. Returning to a prior state that was resourced  is a good reminder of resiliency and health if there was a traumatic birth or post birth time.  In sessions, guide your client through each pre-vertebrate pattern while you float them. 
It is possible to devote an entire water session to each prevertebrate pattern. I suggest  using a nose plug to explore underwater. 
1. Vibration: This is the first sense of energy in motion. It is an important one, and sub tle. Think of it as the soul’s signature, unique to itself. Use humming to start the sense of  vibration. Take plenty of breaths. Pause between humming and feel for the movement or  energy of vibration. With clients, hum into their ear, and then have them do the humming  so they can “hear/feel” their own vibration. 
2. Cellular Breath, Fluid, & Presence: This pattern brings deep awareness and  presence, an ease to the nervous system. It allows rest because there is “nothing to do, no where to go,” meaning all activity is already happening and well supported on the cellular  level. Biology teaches us that every cell naturally hosts mitochondria. Mitochondria are  a direct resource; they offer up water and oxygen as a natural byproduct. It is now found  that they even help produce chlorophyll! Tuning into this inner support means that every  cell has breath and fluidity. Imagine one large single celled organism breathing to evoke  an overall feeling of cellular breath, and then take that sense of support into every cell. The  quality is non-effort, “nothing to do, nowhere to go, simply to be.” Let the nervous system  and cellular consciousness enjoy this relaxed presence. 
3. Sponging: This pattern engages fluid support without effort as the ocean moves  through a sea sponge. The “warm ocean” of the fluid body bathes cell membranes tune and  brings nutrients while removing toxins. This patterns helps build a resilient cell membrane  that is flexible and communicative. Use gentle nourishing imagery with clients. Help them  to imagine a sea sponge anchored to the ocean floor, bathed by the waters of the sea. Feel  the tissue getting renewed, and the membranes finding a balanced tone.
4. Pulsation or “jellyfish”: Engage movement by engaging the cell membrane to  condense or expand. The first pattern of cellular locomotion, pulsation brings in active  movement. Imagine the way a jellyfish moves through the ocean. Start subtly, feeling the  membranes in motion. Then allow the sense to be at a tissue level, perhaps a full body  level. 
5. Starfish or Navel Radiation: Navel radiation “radiates” energy; allowing full  body engagement rather than isolated perception in the limbs. It can be used to help  someone reduce shock in the umbilicus due to infant experience where the umbilical cord  was cut without allowing the placental blood to return to the baby post-birth. See my book,  Birth’s Hidden Legacy, Vol 1, for information on “umbilical affect.” 
Bring awareness to the navel area. Squeeze the tissue to wake it up. Start at the umbilicus  and imagine energy lines to the extremities; hands and feet, face/head, and pelvic floor/ tail. Energy travels from periphery to core, core to periphery. 
Add breath. Next, like a 6-limbed starfish, awaken the limbs of 2 hands, 2 feet, pelvic  floor/tail, and head/face/mouth. Curl in from the navel and then out, folding in all the  limbs. Next curl in by touch to the periphery, more a withdrawal reflex or navel yield.You  can massage the hands and feet in the water helping energy connect to the end points.  Push out from the navel to the endpoints. Finally, make sure an impulse travels from a  hand through the navel to a foot, or to the tail, or head. Explore all stimulus response com 
binations of limbs, using a peripheral push sending energy through the navel to express  through a different limb. This awakens spherical perceptions, and underlies naval yield  righting reactions. 
6. Mouthing: In embryology, we start our development in the spherical shape of the  fertilized egg go through cell division as a blastocyst, implant, and then begin to grow  more tubular as the neural and digestive folds occur as well as the notochord growing. The  mouthing pattern engages the movement of the digestive tube, keeping it flexible and full  bodied. This supports connection to the organs, and enhances spinal flexibility. Mouthing  also engages turning of the head when the mouth reaches to one breast or the other in  order to nurse. 
Buzz the lips, suck on them, awaken them. Squeeze and release the anus. Suck on the  tongue or cheeks. Feel the rhythm of the sucking and expand that along the length of the  digestive tube. Look for the organic orienting impulse of the mouth. WIth client permis sion, awaken the mouthing primitive reflex. Stroke along a corner of your client’s mouth  out along the jaw. Look to awaken a spontaneous movement that turns the head. Explore  the spitting out reflex (turning away) as well as the taking in reflex (turning towards).  When you explore your own body awareness, stimulate the tail end of the digestive tube  and let it initiate a spiral movement through the digestive tube, anus to mouth. Explore  mouth initiation into movement, and tail initiation into movement. 
7. Notochord: In early embryology, a tube called the notochord grows in between the  neural tube and the digestive tube. It can flex and extend. It is connected to the pituitary, 
of that potent juicy support in order to help the spine to stay supple. Initiate full body flex ion and extension in the water. Power this movement from the notochord, not the limbs or  the navel. Let the water support the ease of movement and potency of expression.
BMC Vertebral Patterns 
Knowing how spinal origins start in utero is helpful, and vertebral patterns are the next  advancement in developmental expression post birth. As mentioned in the footwork sec tion, the names of the developmental vertebral patterns are: Spinal, Homologous, Ho molateral, Contralateral, and Brachiation. Below are in depth explanations of patterns  followed by how to use in the pool for sessions. 
Vertebral patterns introduce the bones. Bones allows us to move through space. These  patterns give a movement map in relationship to spine and limb integration. 
Map of Developmental Movement 
(excerpted from The Developing Infant) 
Developmental patterns integrate the head with the spine and limbs  
Developmental patterns give a succinct and useful way to help infants with movement and  brain development. Learn their sequence and how to use your hands to help babies.  
The following stuffed animal pictures are symbolic reminders of each pattern an infant ex plores in development. Development is progressive, as in “stair steps” for the brain; from  prone on the floor to standing. Each pattern builds upon the previous pattern. Infants  you care for may have skipped patterns and moved on to the next, which means they have  a gap in their support structure. If you observe an infant in your care that has skipped a  pattern, please help them go back to the earlier pattern through hands-on supported touch  and play.

“Stuffed Animal” Reminders for your Learning… 
Dolphin Spinal Development: head to tail, tail back to head. Both push and reach  patterns  
Frog Homologous: Upper and lower body connection: Both upper limbs to tailbone,  Both lower limbs to head. No bilateral movement.  
Salamander Homolateral Push Pattern: one side, then the other side; lateral  spinal flexion supports bilateral movement and weight bearing.  
Cat pushing back Homologous Push into Reach Pattern: push with the up pers into reach with the (Transition Pattern) tail and lowers.  
Coyote Contralateral Reach and Pull Pattern: diagonal integration of upper  and lower limbs to core  
Monkey Brachiation: Reach into Pull patterns 
Spinal Patterns 
Spinal Activations in Utero and at Birth 
Push with the head, push with the tail is the first vertebral pattern in Body-Mind Centering  and happens with the head and tail during birth. In utero, cells migrate, respond, and form  tissues. Prior to the spine, the notochord (from previous section) is the support underlying  whole body flexion and extension pattern. In utero this initiates from the feet as they push  against the mother’s uterus. Movement of the bones of the feet is key for development, and  it sets a template for relating to gravity while crawling and walking. 
Birth creates a major impression on the spine.(see Birth’s Hidden Legacy, Vol 1). During  birth, energy changes from the feet to a head initiation. Spinal push with the head takes  energy downward to a push with the tail. This energy sequences back up the spine into a  reach with the head as baby exists the birth canal. Look for the spinal support for reach  with the head to appear at the level of the heart as well as the brain. This head heart reach  is followed by a spinal reach with the tail as baby elongates during the birth journey. 
Either injury, or birth factors can interrupt the connected energy of the spine. Birth factors  are: c- section delivery, vacuum suction, forceps, breech position (distorts proprioception  through the sacrum and jaw), or simply being born face-up (distorts the cervical spine and  pulls on the jaw). 
A pilates instructor and trainee in my perinatal course showed me her spinal X-rays. Her  cervical spine was completely straight, even though she had had no accidents or injuries.  I was amazed that simply being born “sunny side up” (posterior position) could have such  an impact on spinal structure. Pilates helped return a bit of cervical curve, however she  still had occiput pain and assessed that it was due to her birth.  
With the BMC support to release high tone and perinatal support to release long ago emo tional trauma patterns related to birth, this woman was finally able to discover a felt sense  of yield which provided the awareness for deep healing of her nervous system and integra tion of tissues.(see Birth’s Hidden Legacy, Vol 2, for treatment tips). 
Spinal Push and Reach with the Head and Tail  
Spinal push and spinal reach patterns engage the energetic action of the whole spine, head  to tail, tail back to head. Spinal integration starts as a push pattern and sequences from  a push into a reach. Explore spinal pattern on land while on your knees. Curl into a ball,  head on the floor. Rock back and forth through the spine. Pay especial attention to press 
ing downward through the tibia and ankles so the hips narrow enough to let the spine  float.
In the water, explore condensing into a ball, gathering energy and push with the head  against a float or have a client push into your hands. Use the ladder exercise below to  awaken spinal and ligament awareness. 
Spinal Awareness and Assessment in the water 
Whether floating a client, or curling them against the ladder, be sure to notice if the spine  has integrity throughout its length, or if there is a gap in the spinal integration. Use your  hand to assess, and notice if parts of the spine are flexible and other parts braced or weak.  Water movement reveals this so much more easily than land based sessions. 
Spinal work while floating 
Use water moves that support the spinal movements. Assess and support spinal flexion ex tension, and lateral side bending flexion/extension. Assess and support spinal rotational  movements. Use spinal patterns to bring ease to the nervous system. 
Use just the right amount of pressure against your client’s spine that allows them to ex plore the sensations in their body. Check front and back body. The ability to fully flex the  front of the spine rather than brace the tissue allows information to go into the spine,  rather than bounce off the external muscles. You may have to teach your client how to sof ten muscles so they can get more spinal integration. Awareness is the first step in muscle  change. 
When floating a client, use a nose clip and side lie them in the water. Curl them into a ball  with their head curled into your elbow as you press in along the sacrum. Let them explore  initiating the push with the tail and feel it travel through the spine to a reach with the head.  Coach your client to feel the difference between spinal push and reach, and how a curled  condensed push sequences naturally into an extended spinal reach pattern. 
Emotions may arise. The emotional section of this text will teach you how to work with  emotions that emerge via the body. Be prepared to help your client with this, and also have  a referral to a psychotherapist available.

Spinal Sequence using ladder or pool wall 
Prepare for ladder work by activating potency and energy through the spine and legs. Float  your client, stretching their arms, and legs. Next invite them to find the pleasure of kicking  on their back as you support their head in a floating position while they kick around the  pool. 
1. Bring your client to the ladder (or to the pool side if no ladder is available). Have  them grip the top of the ladder, tuck into a ball, and place their feet on a lower  rung, hip width apart. It is important that feet are flat against the side of the rung,  not resting on the achilles tendons so feet are able to push against the rung. I use  the 2nd rung so they are at least halfway submerged. 
2. Stand behind them so your chest is against their spine, use your body to help them  curl in and feel supported. 
3. Push your feet against the floor of the pool and lean in against them to provide  more pressure. Help them to condense and get smaller, tucking into a ball. I of ten place one foot on a lower rung so my bent leg can provide support under my  client’s sacrum. I then place a hand on their head and add pressure so they have a  full head to tail connection.  
4. Dialog to find out what feels best. You can reach around them and hold the sides  of the ladder if they need help folding in or want more pressure. 
5. Have them push out a bit against you and fold back in a number of times, integrat ing from core to legs. 
6. Assess flexor tone of the front body by checking muscle tension. With permission,  (always ask first) reach to your clients tummy with an open hand. As you touch  their tummy feel if the deepest psoas muscles are working, and if your client feels  high or low tone in the belly.  
7. Teach them about core flexion. Flex your hand against their skin to give them the  idea of how to load in the deeper flexion of the muscles. Invite flexion between the  pubic bone and the navel, and from the navel up to the back of the heart, making  sure the spine is in a nice c-curve.  
8. Load the spinal movements into memory. Have your client fold all the way in and  extend out gently, finding the right muscles to build the felt-sense of spinal inte gration and potency.  
9. Repeat this a number of times, gently increasing the pressure load each time.  Once they are comfortable condensing and expanding a bit, begin to take the full  range of these motions.  
10. When you feel they are ready, have them push all the way out, away from the pool  ladder or sidewall. Be ready! This will be energetic. Duck down as they float over  you. Invite them to kick their legs energetically, making the water choppy, and  move energy through the low spine, sacrum, legs, and feet.
The ladder exercise is worth repeating for a number of sessions in a row. It helps clients  become familiar with their own potency. Potency is essential and allows clients to address  deeper body story imprints. Potency keeps clients present so they can deal with internal ized fears and defenses due to trauma, rather than dissociating in the water or “blissing  out” as a way of avoiding overwhelm or even birth anesthesia imprints. 
Break the ladder sequence into smaller parts to help a client gain awareness of psoas mus cle work and how to flex through the navel area or chest. With permission, I use my hand  on their belly or sternum to invite flexion through the psoas muscles or chest area. (See From Conception to Crawling, page 59, Psoas Complex and Muscle Currenting Exercise). 
Spinal Pattern Work in the Water 
• Place your client facing the ladder or poolside, feet on a ladder rung or pool edge,  holding on with their hands. 
• Have them flex their spine and curl. Brace your leg on the ladder rung to provide  support for their sacrum and tail.  
• Load them into flexion, using your chest against their back, so they have full  support to feel themselves softening and drawing in from the navel up and down  the spine.  
• With permission place a hand on top of their head so you are loading energy into  the spine from the hand on head and your knee at the tail end.  
• Make sure there is a full flexion through the navel area without any gaps in the  integration of spinal flexion.  
• Provide resistance with your body. Let them push out partway and curl in a few  times to get them ready to find the full push power and extend out through the  legs. 
• When ready, have them push out fully with power and kick. Be sure to duck un der them when they push forcefully out. 
• Let them kick and splash so the legs engage and they feel their potency. • They have to push you backward through the water.  
Homologous with the upper limbs and lower limbs 
This pattern connects upper limbs to tail and lower limbs to head. Imagine a frog hopping.  They use both lower limbs to push, and both upper limbs to push in order to move. Ho mologous highlights integration of the upper and lower body halves into the spine.
Homologous Push: Uppers and Lowers 
Both hands to tail, both feet to head: Use body resistance and the pool wall or  ladder for feedback and support. 
1. Have your client stand and push both hands against your hands, feeling the resist ance. Support energy going into the spine and down to the tail.  
2. Next isolate the lowers and place both feet against the wall or ladder. Push with  the feet to take energy headward. Let your client push out against the wall. Feel  energy go to the head.  
3. Play with the energy of hands to tail, or feet to head integration.  
4. Explore homologous in different positions and movements; anywhere that you  have both arms doing the same action, and both legs doing the same action while  feeling the integration into the spine. 
5. For underwater work, hold both feet and let clients push out and return while you  firmly grasp their feet. 
6. Do the same with the hands; grasping both hands as clients push out and come in. 
Homolateral Push with The Uppers and Lowers  
Homolateral is the next developmental milestone following homologous. It underlies  crawling and is also a push pattern. Homolateral highlights lateral flexion of the spine and  side to side intelligence, a bilateral awareness.  
Think of a salamander that flexes the spine in a lateral curve. Notice how the tail separates  from what the legs are doing. The limbs will flex and the spine will make a concave lateral  to that side. The spine is thus in a c curve toward the flexed limb side. Simultaneously, the  opposite limbs extend, readying the body for the next movement of a homolateral gate.  
Elephants walk with a homolateral gait. When you see this gait in children, the “frank enstein” walk, it is unnatural, and shows poor developmental integration. It is a good as sessment under stress to see which children or adults revert to a bilateral walk rather than  moving up the developmental scale into contralateral. If you see this, the treatment is to  go back down to homologous or even spinal, to bring a child up the developmental ladder  of integration. Opening the bilateral listening through Integrated Learning System (google  ILS or Tomatis) can help immensely with sensory processing issues. 
To explore homolateral, think one side of the body, then the other side.  
1. Use water movements that curl the client against your chest with flexed leg and  arm, while extending the other side.  
2. Use flexion/extension movements, pulling on a same side hand or foot to extend
3. Fold a same side hand and foot together while floating. 
4. Go back and forth side to side, highlighting both same side limbs coming in and  the feeling of going inward 
5. Highlight both same side limbs extending outward and the feeling of going out.  6. Watch and support the spine to find ease in lateral flexion. 
Contralateral Movements  
This pattern is the beginning of reaching with the limbs. It engages a higher brain level,  and is the “all fours” creeping you see infants do on land. Contralateral is the cross crawl,  and integrates the diagonal core of the body, like an x roll.  
1. In floating, bring opposite limbs together. 
2. Start with only one foot against the wall or ladder, leg flexed. 
3. Push out and let that push travel through the navel to support a reach with the  opposite hand.  
4. Alternate legs and repeat.  
5. Reverse position so that the hand is against the ladder or wall. Repeat the se quence, so you are finding a reach through the legs.  
6. Play with variations to engage this pattern. 
Brachiation Pull Patterns 
For full satisfaction, we need to be able to reach and then pull things toward us. Infants  put objects into their mouth, returning to a yield and finding the satisfaction of discovery.  Ponder how all the previous push patterns have prepared the body mind for a push into  a reach, take hold, and pull. Like an ape swinging through the trees, we want to evoke the  power of reach, take hold and pull. 
1. Start close to the wall or ladder with client flexed in against the support. Have  them push one foot out and then reach for your forearm, take hold, and pull you  in toward them.  
2. You can vary this by having clients pull on a noodle. 
3. Make sure you find the strength of this pattern. It can be emotional, as it is en gaging in the need for contact, so be sure to process emotions as they arise. See  emotions section.  
4. Make sure the client can enjoy the potency and fun of this pattern as well.
Remember that when floating, you can use a movement sequence during each session  that progresses through all the patterns. You can then return and highlight one pattern. In  floating, build up to contralateral by progressing through the patterns.
Outdoor Beach Play with the patterns 
Spending a morning at Crane’s beach in Massachusetts inspired me to write this book.  At water’s edge, on my belly where earth and sea meet, was a great way to experience the  sensations of developmental patterns. The sand gives proprioceptive feedback, and the  water keeps that fluid base for ease and curiosity. I spent hours exploring movements in  just a few inches of water. 

Years ago I met the woman who created the Naked Ape theory of evolution. She was a  Welsh housewife who pondered things, had been around children, and reflected on how  apes would need both to care for their young, find safety, and to eat. In the ‘70’s she de veloped her theory that suggested apes learned to walk more upright by crossing shallow  waters and connecting with the sea. Her theories were was scorned for many years, until  finally in 1991, she was awarded the International Science Achievement Award. 
It’s wonderful to imagine evolving up out of the sea. Whether that is true or not, we do  know we at least came from the watery world of the womb. The transition from womb  movement to land movement is an important learning curve in body development, and  knowing the developmental patterns and language of movement integration will help you  to help your clients.
Pattern Practice at the Beach exploring transitions from water to land 
1. Lie on your belly at waters edge. Raise and lower your head. Flexion and exten sion are common spinal movements in utero. Feel the tone of the spine and find  middle tone. Explore energy into the sacrum and low back. 
2. Press the tops of your feet into the sand. Feel the connection to the feet as support  for the raising of the head.  
3. Discover an even energy presence throughout the length of your spine. Play with  your spine, using the sand to help you in that in-between place of resistance and  flow. 
4. Add the play of the developmental patterns. 
5. Explore Homologous. Push both uppers into the sand with bent elbows. Feel con nection to tail. 
6. Press the tops of both feet into the sand and feel this travel to the head. 
7. Explore homolateral. Play with lateral curving of the spine into lateral flexion and  extension. Fish have a“lateral line of perception” which helps them move grace fully and quickly without bumping into each other. Humans need lateral flexion  to crawl and support three dimensional movements.  
8. Work with containing energy to allow the push against gravity to travel back into  the spine and build potency.  
9. Flex laterally without lifting your hip or shoulder. Work to keep the spine flat  against the sand so the arc is purely lateral. Can you arc around your navel, and  through your ribs? 
10. Explore “crawling” out of the sea in homolateral. Feel the resistance of the water. 
11. Accentuate the reach of the hands, and transition levels, using push/reach to  bring yourself to all fours. Creep a few paces forward and backward, reaching  through the hands, or through the feet.  
12. Prepare to stand. Feel the downward push and upward reach all the way to the  Brachiation pattern. Imagine you are pulling on a vine and push pull yourself into  upright walking. 
Group Water Exercises 
Damian Leuthold, founder of Be in Touch, is a BodyMind Somanautics graduate and facil itator who has a deep love of community. He organizes movement oriented events in na ture and teaches Contacting the Dark, a contact improvisation exploration where sight is  eliminated. Damian has taken groups into warm water pools and was gracious to include  some of his discoveries in this section. 
Body Awareness exercise prior to Group Work 
Developing Ease with Full Submersion 
Full submersion is an otherworldly whole body experience. It is a place where you can gain  many important insights into yourself and your relationship with your environment and  it can be very satisfying. 
Many people have fears about going fully under water. This can cause them to limit their  expressiveness and miss a whole range of experiences. 
Head Submersion Exercise 
New ease and freedom can be found in the water if you gently explore the sensations and  feelings that come up as you submerge your head. 
Vertical - Start by keeping your body vertical and letting yourself slowly sink to the point  where you first notice changes in sensation/emotion. See if you can pause there, while al ways giving yourself permission to raise back up if the sensations are escalating.  
Non-Vertical Exploration - If you can keep you nose below the surface for a while start to  shift the orientation of your head. Try to discover what the actual limitations are of how  much you can tilt your head without having water come in your nose. You might be sur prised how much range of motion there is.  
Blowing air out your nose - If the water is close to coming in your nose you can blow  air out your nose to keep the water out. This can allow you to go fully upside down without  needing a nose plug! 
Group Ritual: Sweat lodge style 
Embodied ritual in warm water can be transformational. It can be a safe space where par ticipants are free of the normal constraints of their lives and have the chance to hear the  messages of their nature and the nature of reality. 
One way to approach an aquatic ritual is to structure it similar to a sweat lodge. There  would be: a talk through at the start; a stating of intentions; an entry into the sacred space 
(water in this case); activities in the the sacred space; a closing; and an exit and reflection. 
You can choose your own approach, our aquatic sweat lodge ritual was 4 rounds, with  each round being around 20 minutes (per person if a partnered activity). Each round was  themed in relation to an element and with matching activities. Earth - Aquatic Authentic  Movement to settle into self, group, and environment; Air - Simultaneous Solo Move 
ment with attention to breath; Water - Parter Floating attuning to the water; Fire - Group  Aquatic Contact Improvisation with energetic push, pull and glide. Focus on vitality of  expression with awareness of safety. 
Aquatic Authentic Movement 
Authentic Movement (AM) is a witnessed closed eye free movement dance therapy form  where participants attend to their inner world. They practice attending to their “authentic”  experience, action, and reaction to the moment. 
In AM participants split up into couples or small groups. They take turns taking on a mov er or witness role. Each round is initiated when the mover makes eye contact with their  witness(s) then closes their eyes. The mover is then free to move and emote, or not, as they  please until the round ends (minimal talking). They then open their eyes and do a short  verbal check in with their witness(s) speaking about their experience as if it is happening  now. They might say “I am a mover who …”. The witness then also do a past as present  verbal check in that might start “I am a witness who ...”. Participants then switch roles. 
In aquatic AM, the mover needs to take special care to not hurt their head. That means  they should use their hands around their heads as antennae when they are moving their  head or their is activity around their head or they are near a wall or floor.  
It can be helpful to have props in the pool with you. They can be things like: floaty noodles,  kick boards, beach balls. 
Some activities that might occur during the free movement: • Pushing off the floor or walls 
• Exploring levels 
• Wild kicking 
• Yelling underwater 
• Sinking and hanging off of float 
• Play with bubbles 
• Floating on noodles
Contact Improvisation 
Contact Improvisation is a dance form where participants exchange weight, touch, and  momentum, co creating movement play and expression. It can be vigorous or quiet, with  one partner or many. Participants can move however they like but with a focus on self  responsibility and relational interaction. Emphasis is placed on cultivation of inner atten 
tion, awareness, and bodymind resources. 
CI Games 
Active/Passive Continuum  
• One partner starts passive and is floated, and then gradually they are both active  and then the active person becomes passively floated. 
2 on 1 
• 2 people attending to 1 person 
• Rotate who is the 1 person swimming 
1 on 2 
• One person standing as a post pillar that the swimmers can use for leverage 
Explorations within an activity 
• Looking up at the surface from below 
Noodle/body raft 
• Any BMS explorations can be done as a group.
Make Your Own Moves 
I encourage you to use your body knowledge and the BMC map to explore bringing more  ease and flexibility to clients. Below are some “names” of exercises found in water train ings. See if you can imagine how to do them and what their benefit might be? What devel opmental moves and pattern integration do they support? Some use a noodle, and some  use individual leg floats. 
Be sure to have good footwork as you practice. 
Embryo: Curled in egg position. Client can be in water curled against your chest, or un derwater holding nose or with nose plug. Please do not have client curled in, head between  your knees and facing your crotch as you walk through water. This can activate uncon scious issues related to safety, sexuality, and trust. Turn them around facing out if you use  this position, or clarify energy through discussion prior to facing you. 
One side flexed, one extended while floating: Awaken tissue with touch and  movement, and rotate sides. 
Knees to chest and out: Use both legs, and then individual legs. 
Hands curl, forearms cross to sternum and out: Use both arms, and then  individual arms. 
Touching feet to wall or hands to wall: full contact, explore endpoints Gentle floating, holding head: Follow rotational patterns of client. Cross arm head floating: Client on their back, hands on their heart and belly Lateral flexions and extensions: Find many ways to include lateral spine Spinal twists: Be sure to flex and extend the spine in all its dimensions. 
Neck release: Please do not attempt this without guidance or clear understanding of  client’s neck strength and only with permission. Hold both sides of occiput, client on back.  Use momentum, and forearm stability to roll client over to front while you move back in  water. 
Underwater foot holds: Client pushes out and in using the ankles. Make sure they  have enough head space to not bump into the side of the pool.  
Underwater hand holds: Client pushes out and in using their wrists. Make sure they  have enough head space to not bump into the side of the pool.  
Underwater spirals: Allow clients to go under, and spiral them gently so they take 
over the spiralic movement. Do not let them obsess with this move, as they might be acti vating shock and dissociating.  
Many variations on these themes: Enjoy your discoveries!

Advanced Essential Skills 
This section gives you a skill set for advanced work. We touch on emotions, pre and peri natal issues, bodymind shock, early attachment, and contact boundary skills. Theory and  practice exercises shape these skills. 
In addition to helping with physical pain or ease, water therapy allows the opportunity to  help clients integrate earliest body memory. Integration means understanding of events,  release of out-dated protective response patterns, and healthy emotional release. Water is  fluid, as are our emotions. It connects to the earliest sense of self, and repairs imprints that  interruption the ease of energetic wholeness, of soul into body in relation to body, mind,  and spirit.  
You need a wide variety of skills for this larger task. Start with the practitioner skills to  safely provide physical support for your client in water. Then add the awareness of emo tional and psychological work.  
This section addresses in-depth skills and theory that will give you better knowledge as a  clinician. 
Verbal skills 
It is essential to know how and when to use verbal dialog in the water. Dialog provides a  number of supports: 
• Provides you with feedback from your client on how things are working in the  session 
• Helps a client feel empowered and engaged in the process 
• Levels out the balance of power in a session 
• Helps you understand and assess psychological issues that might be emerging 
Use of verbal skills does not mean you get into a lot of “talking.” Rather, you know how  to ask questions at the right moment that direct your interventions and give your client  increased safety and consideration. Also, you can learn if your client is “thinking think ing,” even while you are moving their body. Dialog can expose this, and you can alter your  touch, perhaps giving stronger pressure in order to invite them to a deeper level of reso nance. They might need to energize first by initiating movement.
Some simple suggestions for what to say:  
• If you are bored or excessively thinking, let me know. It means we are not yet in  the right “place” together. 
• If your mind continues to race during the session, we might need to do a little  kicking to energize your body so it can stay present. 
• Be sure to call or email me after a session if you had any fears arise for any rea son, or felt mad or disappointed after your session. It might be triggering early  material. 
• Water work evokes many layers of experience. I encourage you to journal and get 
• additional support. I have some recommendations for therapists if you are in terested.
Observation and Intention Skills 
Train your eyes to keenly notice changes in: 
• Tissue tone 
• Posture 
• Skin color 
• Breath movements 
• Rotational ease 
• Energetic arousal or passivity 
Check range of motion and developmental integration. Notice whether your clients tissues  are rigid, flaccid, blood filled, tight in the joints, organs, ligaments, or nerves. Do they have  spinal integrity, homologous upper and lower integration, homolateral balance, and the  ability to cross laterally integrate and move? Are primitive reflexes supporting them for  ease in alert response to pressure and change, or are they easily startled or not successfully  alert? 
Be aware of your intention for interventions. At what level are you working with this cli ent? Are you wanting to provide womb like support? Is it the containment and proprio ceptive support of the placenta, or the pressure of the birth canal, or the spiritual essence  space for when the soul incarnates? 
Are you working with fear? Do you want to help your client enter the “scary unknown” and  return in confidence and success? Each territory demands a different intention and at tention to detail. Having such a range of “knowing” and curiosity at your fingertips allows  each client to be “met” during the diverse needs of their unfolding healing journey.
Sensory Processing 
Water returns one to earliest body sensations; in utero relating to water more so than to  gravity. Flow, pressure, and movement evoke cellular memory. Whether your clients are  adults, children, or infants, water helps them access identity formation that was pre-cog nitive, prior to speech and language, that time of 0-18 months development. 
This is the time where cellular experiences are encoded as “bodystory” in the tissue and  brain. This is known as “implicit memory.” Healing happens when these memories become  “explicit” and are participated in. Water work offers superb healing at this level. Sessions  repair inner processing of sensation and complete interrupted movement sequences. 
Awareness and curiosity of what is being evoked by the elements and forces of water  linked to developmental understanding helps you as a therapist. Respect the power of  your position as practitioner, knowing you might be enrolled as a reparative “midwife.”  Perinatal Psychology offers key wisdom teachings about the conscious perceptions of self  during this experiential time, including experiences within the womb, during birth, and  post birth. 
Potency is Necessary for Treatment 
Establish a baseline potency to help your client integrate stressful life experiences that  were pre-cognitive. Relaxing at the wrong moments can interrupt the energy needed to  heal. Please offer the full range of autonomic nervous system and body function, which  includes the healthy repair of the autonomic nervous system (ANS). In polyvagal terms,  this means pushing and splashing for the healthy sympathetic aspect (recreational excite 
ment), followed by the deep quiet (not dissociation or freeze) of the parasympathetic rest  and digest, plus the healthy social connection (your presence as a felt-sense of support). 
Help clients find yield in the nervous system to balance tone, feel a spinal head to tail  connection, and establish potency rather than dissociation. This brings the needed vitality  to the tissues and emotional life. Educate your client about potency as well as “ease” and  relaxation. This will make your work in the water easier and more interesting. 
Support without Invasion: The right amount of contact 
Water work is by nature an intimate arrangement. People are in bathing suits, and touch is  necessary. To establish a baseline of trust, I engage with spatial boundaries during the first  session. See the Near/Far energy of boundaries in the Advanced Skills relational section. 
Birth Stories  
Birth stories appear energetically in water sessions. If your client feels energetically gone  during a session, check in on their birth history. Clients often dissociate in a way that  looks like relaxation, but is not useful for them. You can end up feeling ineffective in the  process. Client dullness or “going away” can mask early overwhelming fears, memories of  times where they needed to “escape the body;” or indicates birth pain medications, such  as anesthesia. 
If, during birth, a client’s mother had anesthesia, twilight sleep, ether, or a “cocktail” to re duce birth pain, your client is likely to have a dissociative tendency due to this imprinting  experience. Dissociation tendencies appear as a lack of emotional presence, a flickering in  and out of attention, or them seeking to zone out or go into a trance while in the water. Do  not support trances or mistake dissociation for relaxation. 
Dissociation is Not Relaxation 
A relaxed client will still be present. Unfortunately water practitioners are not trained  to recognize the difference between relaxation and dissociation. Often they unknowingly  promote activate dissociation in clients by mistaken dissociation for relaxation. This is a  disservice and is not recommended. 
Your client may be floating above their body, up on the ceiling, or may be deep inside, as in  a cave. You want them available and responsive, and able to hold energy without resisting  pressure and escaping. 
Become aware of what dissociation feels like to the bodymind. With practice, this becomes  palpable and easy to recognize. Parasympathetic dissociation feels like a lack of presence,  both physically and emotionally, where a client is “too relaxed,” the tissues seem low in  potency, and clients feel too far away. Sympathetic dissociation feels like jumping around,  with an inability to settle or relax, or a mental disconnection from the body. 
I educate my clients about dissociation. I ask them if they have had anesthesia from sur gery or during their birth. During floating, if I sense dissociation, I will ask them verbally if  they feel present. This dialog helps clients engage with the water healing at a deeper level.  
For more information, see Birth’s HIdden Legacy, Volume 2. It has a thorough explana tion of the Autonomic Nervous System and its function when in health or when in shock or  trauma. It contains sections with interventions and a thorough somatic section highlight ing bodymind centering theory. See the excerpted paragraph on shock later in this text as  an example. 
In and Out of the Body 
If I sense a client is dissociated, I ask them if they are in their body or not? We play a game  of “in and out,” which motivates clients to explore what being in the body actually feels  like. One hypersensitive child who couldn’t tolerate the application of sunscreen (due to  tactile sensitivity) told me that he was up on the ceiling above the pool. I responded, 
“oh, that’s good news. At least you are nearby. I could feel that! Now, tell me when you  think you are in your body.” 
This ten year old and I played the game of “in and out” until he felt that he could stay in  his body and meet the pressure of my touch and of the water movement. After that one  session his mom reported that she was able to apply sunscreen to his skin with no hassle.  Asking clients their own perception of “where they are” can give you some useful guidance  for treatment.
Advanced Practices 
Partner Exercises To Explore Push/birth Movements  
Courtesy of Damian Leuthold, a Brook Institute trained therapist. 
Dyad Exercise:  
• Place feet on wall and head push into partner’s chest or belly. Helps one to orient  toward pressure and push through it. 
• Start in corner, and head push in between therapist’s side and the wall. • Take a breath, dive down, and push from wall out between partners calves. 
Group Exercise: Long birth swim 
• People stand in a line facing one side of the pool. Active person swims through  everyone’s legs, like swimming through the birth canal. This can feel exhilarat ing and repattern the nervous system related to birth trauma where a baby was  stuck.  
Using Props:  
• Use a kickboard against the wall. Swim cap is recommended as hair can pull with  this exercise. 
• Explore with the head against kick board, then let them turn and place feet  against wall while you hold the kickboard so their head can push against it. Let  client engage and push through as in a birth. Make sure they can rise up for air  at any time and take it slow. 
In Triads:  
• Active person, feet on wall, push yourself out in between support persons sides  while they keep pressure against you. This helps learn how to relate to both pres sure and support. 
After some support, let clients discover discover solo ways to explore push with the head  and tail in the water using the ladder or pool. 
Clearing Anesthesia 
If a client has been subjected to surgeries, including a c-section, or chemicals when being  born, they likely have an unconscious residual felt sense of anesthesia memory in their  cells and tissue. Since cells replace often, and the entire body has replaced its cells every  seven years, it is highly unlikely there is actual residual anesthesia. However the symp-
toms of anesthesia appear in clients when in the water! It is this author’s theory that cells  keep recreating the “things” they survived, similar to neural coupling. Neural coupling is  where a behavior is coupled that was utilized in early survival, even if it is not useful.  
An example was my tendency to isolate under stress rather than seek help. As unfulfilling  as it was, I continued to do so until I was able to locate the double bind behavior, befriend  it, and release the fear of invasion coupled with abandonment from that early imprint.  Perhaps “cellular coupling” is the cells recreating the templates of substances they sur 
vived under stress, and anesthesia imprints are a type of experiential Epigenetics, or sur vival behavioral code that gets repeated. 
Clinicians who understand how impacts of prenatal medication, birth interventions, or birth chemicals affect identity and behavior can help clients heal. Such work repairs name less anxiety, dissociation, tactile defensiveness, hyperactivity, and identity beliefs that are  inaccurate and pervasive. 
What is important is to clear the symptoms of anesthesia memory, which appear as numb ness, dull or heavy tissue, a feeling of low potency, or emotional dissociation. The simplest  way to begin clearing anesthesia memory is to squeeze the organs. 
Finding the Organs 
1. It is helpful to know the location of body organs for this exercise, and to have done  this practice 
2. yourself. Name them aloud and have your partner trace them on their own body  while standing. Next help them develop a felt sense of organs.  
3. With your client curled into a ball using the ladder or side of pool, help become  acquainted with their body organs.  
4. Pick one organ and start by hissing into it, as if their sound were a sonar locating  device. Make the hiss a short pressure-filled sound and use it to generate feedback  about the organ’s dimension and shape. Repeat a number of times, using as much  breath as required. 
5. Next, condense the organ by squishing it, just like squeezing a soft sponge or those  little squishy toy balls and animals that squish down and then puff back up.  
6. Squish a number of times, feeling the organs condense fully and then expand.  
7. Bring client’s attention to the pause between condensing and expanding, getting  comfortable and familiar with the “turn around time,” which is that transition  between condensing and expanding.  
8. Notice if clients are more comfortable with the condensing or expanding phase.  See if you can bring this comfort into a balance with both phases for full organ  resiliency and health.
Squeezing the Organs to Clear Chemical Imprints 
1. Bring your clients to the ladder, as in the “head to tail” exercise. When they are  folded in and secure, ask them to squeeze their organs, like squeezing a sponge,  and let “residual” anesthesia squeeze out of the cells. Often clients will cough.  
2. Encourage them to “dispel” these toxins and then inhale fresh air. Help them to  find relief by bringing in fresh oxygen. Do this after each round of squeezing.  
3. Eliminating toxins and adding fresh oxygen supports cleansing and re-patterning  the cells. Encourage them to do this in between sessions and report back to you. 
4. Spit out the toxins. Sometimes clients taste or smell a type of metallic sensation  related to residual anesthesia imprints. I have a cup nearby they can spit into.  
5. Squeeze the rubbery skin. When anesthesia is in a client’s history, their skin can  appear greenish around the mouth, and they describe that they feel “rubbery.” At  this time, squeeze the skin a bit between your fingers to help it regain a resiliency  and release the imprint of numbness. I squeeze a client’s cheeks or have them do  so, and squeeze arms and legs. 
6. Pushing off the ladder and “kicking out” toxins is another way to bring vitality and  potency to a client, and re-patterns their sense of being a victim to early experi ences.

Psychological, Emotional, Relational 
Body based early impressions are also relational. When you learn to treat the whole cli ent, you bring great benefit. Often emotional and psychological issues arise organically in  sessions once a client builds trust with you. Sometimes they just pop up; the skillful art of  this work is to know when to support expressing emotions and when to provide contain ment. Your goal is to help a client regulate internal emotions and sensations while staying  relational and present. 
Decide whether you will engage this level of work or not. Get support to do so if you have  no training in psychology or psychotherapy. If you choose not to, then refer clients to a  perinatal therapist or psychotherapist. You can also contact The Brook Institute for super vision. 
Another resource is my book, Birth’s Hidden Legacy, vol 1 and 2, and the 8 week online  study group. Birth’s Hidden Legacy is a thorough resource, including interventions, case  studies, and treatment tools. It explores how early times impact the self. BHL was written  for both clients and practitioners to help understand the influence of perinatal themes  mentioned in the following exercises. BHL addresses need shock and shock imprints,  which are triggered physical emotional states that affect the ability to be in the body and  relax. It is useful for both clients and practitioners. 
Emotions and Water Sessions 
Scientist Dr. Masaru Emoto, author of The Hidden Messages in Water, has researched  how water responds to emotions. I suggest reading his book to get the full understanding  and influence of his discoveries. 
Vibrations and Water 
Vibration is the first pre-vertebrate pattern in BMC. We think of it as the ‘soul signature,’  the first energy, even before we have cells. Vibrations travel through water. Emotion can  be thought of as energy in motion. Author/Scientist Candace Pert, in Molecules of Emo tion, documents how emotions release chemicals that flow through our system. Chemicals  send signal messages at the cellular level. Learning to work with vibration and water can  make you a better therapist. 
Years ago, guru Sai Maa requested a warm pool session. The pool water was transformed  by her vibration. The water felt silky and rich, and clients remarked for weeks afterwards  that the water felt so alive! It clearly showed me how important presence is when in the  water!
Emotional Release  
Water sessions can be used to help release repressed emotions. Clients bring stagnant  energy back into motion through kicking, splashing, and subtle movements. For sound  release, clients can go underwater and make vocal noise without bothering the neighbor hood. They can yell, say all those things they wished they had said but didn’t, and “get it off  their chest.” I always go underwater with clients so I can bear witness to their expression.  This mirroring is helpful for building trust and my own assessment of a client’s needs and  next steps in the work. 
Water is very useful for anger release. Releasing emotions back into flow creates a feeling  of power and a sweetness with potency instead of collapse. It opens the 5th chakra and  throat, connecting the head to the heart and the bodymind resets. 
“Anger is like flowing water; there’s nothing wrong with it as long as you let it flow.  Hate is like stagnant water; anger that you denied yourself the freedom to feel, the  freedom to flow; water that you gathered in one place and left to forget. Stagnant  
water becomes dirty, stinky, disease-ridden, poisonous, deadly; that is your hate. On  flowing water travels little paper boats; paper boats of forgiveness. Allow yourself to  feel anger, allow your waters to flow, along with all the paper boats of forgiveness. Be  human.” 
—C. JoyBell C. 
Verbal Integration with clients following emotional release  
We speak aloud about how emotions release energy and look at the waves in the water.  You can literally see the energy released by the waves of potency and energy. Try saying  your version of...““Wow, look at these waves! That is power you can allow and channel.  You allowed your emotions and body to express and return to balance, and your anger was  not threatening because you worked with it consciously. Nice job!” 
Next we speak about integrating emotions and how to transfer this experience into daily  life. I say some version of...“You might not want to scream out loud at someone, but maybe  you could say something like, “Hey, stop. That hurts my feelings.” Or, “I really don’t want  to talk about this now,” and create a healthy boundary with a friend when you need to.” 
Anger and Push Patterns 
I encourage clients in the push series to express energy by hitting the water, making big  splashes, kicking strongly as they push out from the ladder. They are allowing movement  of emotional energy through the body.  
• Bring a client to the ladder and help them load in and activate their push.  • Stand behind them, guide them to feel the potency, and then, “1, 2, 3, push.”
• Encourage clients to vocalize underwater. Go underwater with them. • Integrate the experience with dialog. 
Fear and Hide/Withdraw Patterns 
Underwater Work Helps Locate and Release Fear 
Use underwater work to find out where a client’s fear resides in the bodymind. First invite  your client to dip underwater and observe any sensitivities to being underwater. Next ask  them to practice going under and holding onto your leg as you gently walk around. This  gives them a stability and connection, as well as movement to bring sensation to the skin  and nerves. 
Notice what arises with underwater work. If your client becomes scared and “pops up,” ask  them if they can name what is scaring them. Even if they don’t “know,” have them revisit it  with your support. Be sure they hold onto your leg and you are tracking them well. Revis iting fear is a way to titrate the fear out of their system and build relationship to it. Doing  so allows them to digest early experiences and transform fear into useful energy. 
To release fear, including nameless fear, ask them to go toward the fear, going under again  and adding more awareness. Have them be a “detective” and describe the exact sensations,  color, and felt-sense of what they are experiencing. Gently help them increase their ability  to meet the fear and to tolerate the sensations of it. Ask them to move through the dis 
comfort to find the ease of the moving water. Remind them that they can come up at any  time, and listen well as they describe their experience. Perhaps you will identify prenatal  themes related to toxic womb, or birth themes related to induction chemicals, or a mom’s  anxiety while pregnant. 
Sadness and Healing Waves 
Humans are unique. We have wonderful expressions and sometimes no context for ener gies we felt early on. Very early experience contains emotional energy that is often held in  the existential aspect of world view, meaning when we were very very young and not so  differentiated as self/other. Often energies are felt but don’t even belong to an individual,  due to the “porous” perceptive nature of prenates. 
A prenate can pick up a mother’s grief if their parent suffered a loss while pregnant. It is  very difficult to process emotions that aren’t really “yours,” but are “second hand emo tions.” One 13 year old I treated had developed immune difficulties and a mold allergy.  Her family had moved from Florida to Colorado in hopes the dry air would help. The  girl’s mother, while pregnant, had been tending to her dying father and was filled with an  ongoing grief that her father might not live to see his grandchild. When the mother could 
name this to her daughter, and reclaim her own grief, the girl was able to separate from  her mother’s experience and find resiliency. I had clued into grief as an immune response  because grief often compromises the lungs and weighs on the heart and thymus. Also, I’ve  learned through years of clinical treatment that it is common at the onset of puberty for  birth memories to surface. My hunch about the resurfacing of birth memory is that this oc 
curs due to hormones again flooding the client’s system, as if an echo of hormonal flooding  that occurred during birthing.
Relational Attachment Issues  
Aquatic work naturally brings up early attachment issues. Attachment is the psychologi cal term governing a person’s ability to connect to others and get their earliest relational  and physical needs met. Attachment occurs at a highly dependent and vulnerable time in  infancy when a baby cannot meet their own needs for contact, warmth, “diaper changes,”  and hunger. They are using the mother as a regulating agent for their own nervous system.  Imprints are strong and primal from this time. Attachment issues correlate to both adult  and children’s abilities to relate socially or intimately. 
Sessions are naturally intimate due to client’s being held by the practitioner while they are  floated in the warm pool. This by nature activates regression and cellular imprints for cli ents from time spent in the womb. Water sessions naturally evoke emotional projections  from clients stemming from early imprints relating to safety and trust. Learn how to speak  about this and name the context so emotional confusion does not cloud your session work.  I will often prepare clients for this “deeper dive” ahead of time by doing a birth intake  prior to session work and explaining how water work evokes attachment. Then we have a  baseline language for speaking about things as they arise. 
Please educate yourself about perinatal development. My book Birth’s Hidden Legacy,  was written as a collective narrative on how to treat the primitive imprints and help them  to integrate and heal. Colleague David Sawyer pioneered bringing perinatal awareness to  water work. He continues to teach perinatal water seminars worldwide, primarily in Swit 
zerland. He and I both train water practitioners who treat at the perinatal level. It brings  amazing integration for clients. 
Early Attachment Dynamics 
The excerpt below is from Birth’s Hidden Legacy, Volume 2. It is included for the reader  to have a quick synopsis of attachment understanding. Knowing your client’s attachment  style; whether it is secure, insecure, ambivalent, or controlling/disorganized, will help you  get through relational obstacles during sessions. You can dialog about their early unmet  needs and “need shock;” this will support their understanding and re-patterning toward  ease.

Womb Memories 
Womb time marks the developmental threshold of transition from “spirit, into soul, into  body.” Water practitioners can help client’s to repair or even complete that threshold  crossing. When aware of pre and perinatal themes, water therapists can provide a true  healing journey for clients at an existential level. Bringing clarity to this time frame re 
lieves client’s of long standing issues related to: unworthiness, self-esteem, false bravado,  abandonment fears, and perfectionism efforts.  
Warm water pool sessions evoke womb memories held deep in the tissues and the subcon scious. Simply being in connection while in warm water creates change in clients. Adding  the awareness of early imprints related to birth, pre-cognitive memory, and cellular im prints improves the transformation and healing of clients. Healing early imprints re-es tablishes a baseline of ease in a client’s psyche and body.  
Please stay within the scope of practice comfortable for you as a practitioner. If emotions  or perinatal memories arise, you can work in conjunction with or refer to a attachment  psychotherapist. Keep a good referral list that includes: Perinatal therapists, infant devel opmental educators, and psychotherapists. At Colorado Therapies, we work in collabora tion with a team of referral practitioners. See the BMCA web site for BMC practitioners as  well. 
For resources, my books, Birth’s Hidden Legacy, Vol 1 and 2, and From Conception to  Crawling, a foundation of Developmental Movement, are extremely helpful to under stand the map of how early experience encodes into bodymind behavior. See the reference  section at the end of this book for training programs. 
Prenatal Intake Questions 
Ask the following questions, or use the birth intake form in the Appendix to explore attach ment experiences of your client. Find out the feelings client’s express relating to prenatal,  birth, and attachment time. If they “have no memories,” ask them what they imagine was  occurring during this time?  
Prenatal Time Questions; Was it... 
• An enjoyable conception, or included drugs, alcohol, violence, etc. • Were they alone in utero, or might have had a companion, a twin that “vanished.” • Was mom happy when she discovered she was pregnant? Were they wanted? 
• Were they a “replacement baby” to “save the marriage,” or replaced a parent’s  ambition to be “the ballerina, top executive, or successful person” the parent  never could become. 
• Was in utero time “good enough” or...was there nicotine, cocaine, alcohol, diet  pills, or any medications taken by mom for any reason?  
• Was mom or doctors afraid of premature labor? Was mom confined to bed rest,  and/or taking premie prevention drugs? 
• Were there frequent ultrasounds? 
• What were the ancestral issues? (cultural danger, oppression, genocide, starva tion, suicides, aggressions) 
• How supportive were Mom and Dad during pregnancy, or was there extra stress? 
Birth Influences 
• Did baby arrived in their own timing, or were they induced or emergency or  planned c-section 
• Were parents happy if their child was a boy or girl, not being disappointed • Was labor excessively long, were you stuck in the birth canal? 
• Were there pain management chemicals or induction drugs? 
• Was there any upset in the delivery staff
• Did mom felt safe with her doctor or midwife 
• Was dad was included and supportive 
• Was is a vaginal birth, or c-section 
• Were you head first, or face up (posterior, sunny side up), or breech • Were extra measures used, such as forceps or vacuum suction 
• Was baby placed with mom immediately, or in a nursery 
Post-Birth Influences 
• Did baby nurse? Was bottle fed, was there any difficulty in feeding? • Was baby taken from mom for any reason: jaundice lights, surgery, cleaning • Was the cord clamped and cut right away, or left attached 
• Was mom present, or had postpartum depression 
• If your client is a man or boy, was he circumcised 
• What type of attachment style did mom and baby have together 
• Were there any extra stressors during this time 
Remember that any event that was difficult can heal and repair when it is named and the  bodymind protective mechanisms relax. It is important to remind clients that birth was  a moment in time, and not the “program for life.” However, unless the shock is released  from the nervous system from that time, it can govern child and adult behavior responses  when under stress. (See Birth’s Hidden Legacy, Volume 1 and 2, by this author).
Body & Emotional Shock 
It is helpful to know about nervous system overwhelm, called shock in pre and perinatal  work. In BMC we call is a “nervous system reversal.” It definitely shows up in water work  and can activate your own “unfinished” patterns and interrupt your grounded presence.  
Shock is like radar. If your client is hyper-sensitive, hyper-guarded, hyper-spiritual, “dol phin-like,” or even overly dull in their tissue, they can be in a form of shock. Shock means  that an experience overwhelmed the bodymind and nervous system and produced dissoci ation. It can present as withdrawal patterns, as in escapism, or an aggressive nature, as in  a tendency toward extreme sports, arguments, or picking fights. Chronic head injury acci dents are often linked to birth shock. See free online article anniebrook.com, The Physiol ogy of Shock and Trauma. Volume 2 of Birth’s Hidden Legacy has a complete theory and  intervention section on how to work with shock and trauma. 
Interrupt dissociation shock that looks like relaxation 
Trance states are dissociative and usually have a fusion or merging quality, where the  person is not present. Whether that is the “bliss trance,” “touch trance,” or any “relational  trance,” there is too much energetic merging, a zoning “into and out,” or a felt sense that  something is just a bit “off.” Trances are often related to bonding and attachment issues.  Please interrupt trances. 
Clients may be reluctant to do release a trance pattern, especially if trance was induced  through chemical alterations during birth. The message with that experience becomes “es cape under pressure, and merge into a dissociative existential place because the physical is  too threatening.” Couples often have trouble with love making when one partner is using  or demanding touch trance energy. 
Learning to stay present rather than dissociate is a key aspect of relational ability. Finding  presence and ease means discovering the disruption of ease and comfort in the body, nam ing the situations that occurred, (whether in utero, birth, or from later life experience) and  opening new movement pathways. 
Primitive reflexes are good for interrupting trance states. Another cue in touch is to make  sure the client is “touching you back,” rather than remaining passive. If you touch their  arm, have them use their arm to touch you back. Develop a felt sense for this exchange. It  will make you a better practitioner where touch truly becomes a dialog.  
Once trance is cleared, the path for the supportive bonding that water can provide be comes available. You will really help people when you support them to remain in the body,  release the cellular imprints frozen with fear, and find the potency of their true energy.